The Covid-19 crisis is undermining the business plan and turnaround strategy at the Nuclear Energy Corporation of South Africa (Necsa). The resulting losses are creating debilitating divisions between labour, middle and senior management, executives, and the boards of Necsa and its subsidiaries. Following a tumultuous operational and management period for several years, with massive financial losses, new Necsa chair David Nicholls and acting CEO Ayanda Myoli presented a restructuring and turnaround plan to parliament on May 20. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Mineral Resources and Energy Minister Gwede Mantashe has also been intent on rationalising the management and structure of the companies making up the nuclear group – Necsa, Pelchem, NTP Radioisotopes and Ketlaphela – into a single company with a single board of directors. The restructuring and financial plan was intended to streamline management and to reduce the losses of the group from R160 million in the 2019/20 financial year ending March 31, 2020 to R61 million in 2020/21. Thereafter the financial plan was to show a profit, rising from R205 million in 2021/22 to R1.4 billion in 2029/30. While many considered the turnaround plan to be hopelessly optimistic, even before the Covid-19 crisis, the impact of the local and international lockdown is estimated to have resulted in the Necsa group taking a massive hit, which would increase the expected loss for 2020/21 to more than R300 million. To put the structural rationalisation into effect, the board members of Necsa and its subsidiaries have been rearranged such that all the boards have exactly the same members. This is a precursor to the appointment of external restructuring advisors to fold the separate legal entities making up the group into a single company with a number of operating divisions. Remuneration freeze Also, as a result of the loss-reduction plans for 2020/21, and in line with the major cost-cutting initiatives required from Necsa and its subsidiaries, the board and executive management decided to suspend all wage and salary increases of workers, staff and management across the group. In particular, this meant failing to honour the wage and salary increase commitments of the third year of a binding, three-year collective agreement between each of the group companies and their workforces, by suspending salary and wage increments due on April 1. The major trade union at the group – the National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union (Nehawu) – has painted the wage and salary freeze implemented by the executive management of Necsa group companies as being in defiance of their associated boards. However, Nicholls has confirmed that the boards and executive management of the group companies are indeed fully aligned in respect of the wage and salary freeze. Agreement ‘must be honoured’ In the meantime, on October 26, the Necsa branch of Nehawu sent a letter to the Necsa board (which is common to all Necsa group companies), in which, among other matters, it demands that the wage and salary increases of the three-year agreement be honoured and gives the board seven working days – meaning Thursday, November 5 – to respond. It is further understood that Nehawu took the matter to the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) in an effort to resolve the dispute, but that the CCMA referred the matter to the Labour Court for resolution on the basis that this is not a labour dispute per se, but rather a matter of enforcement of an existing, binding collective agreement between the companies and their workforces. A group of senior and middle managers at NTP Radioisotopes has also sent a letter to the chair of the Necsa and NTP boards demanding that the binding three-year wage agreement be honoured as a matter of proper corporate governance, and that the salary increases frozen on April 1 be paid to management and staff within seven working days. There have been suggestions that NTP Radioisotopes has shown good progress in recovering from a one-year shutdown by the South African National Nuclear Regulator (NNR) in 2018/19 on safety grounds, and is currently profitable and in a position to pay wage and salary increases as per the collective agreement between NTP and its workforce. There have been concerns that, in these circumstances, failure to honour the collective agreement with workers, staff and management at NTP may negatively impact on workforce morale, attitude, safety and commitment to the Necsa group business plan and turnaround strategy presented to parliament. It may also further impact on the confidence of local and international customers of NTP, and on regaining and retaining their support and trust following the earlier production shutdown at NTP. However, Nicholls has indicated that the fortunes of Necsa and NTP are inextricably “joined at the hip”, saying that NTP was started by Necsa and is dependent on the SafariI-1 research reactor at Necsa for its feedstock, and that NTP is simply a commercial vehicle of Necsa that will shortly become fully integrated within Necsa as a single legal entity. In is understood that the Necsa boards were deliberating on Thursday (November 5) on the matters of the collective agreement and the demands by Nehawu and middle and senior managers at NTP. Caught between a rock and a hard place In the meantime, the official response from Necsa’s head of corporate communication and stakeholder relations, Nikelwa Tengimfene, is that: “Necsa is cognisant of the crucial global role it plays in the supply of health enhancing medical isotopes, through its subsidiary NTP Radioisotopes. The optimal and safe operation of [the] Safari-1 nuclear reactor is critical. “However, Necsa’s financial position is negatively impacted by the Covid-19 pandemic. Necsa, with all its subsidiaries, is engaging with labour on how to settle the last year of the three-year collective agreement.” The devastating Covid-19 crisis, the dire financial position of the Necsa group and other state-owned enterprises, the state of the economy, and the three-year public sector remuneration freeze announced by Finance Minister Tito Mboweni on October 28 do, hoever, make wage and salary increases at Necsa increasingly unlikely. Read: Crunch time for Necsa Declaration Chris Yelland declares that he is an interested party in the business of Necsa, having recently undergone a medical procedure involving insertion of 80 tiny pellets containing radioactive iodine produced at NTP Radioisotopes for targeted nuclear radiation therapy (Brachytherapy). Yelland is managing director of EE Publishers.