The rand gained on Monday, lifted by global optimism over coronavirus vaccines and shrugging off ratings downgrades that are likely to push up government borrowing costs. At 1430 GMT, the rand traded at R15.35 versus the US dollar, up 0.52% from its previous close. Black Friday SpecialGet 15% discount on our annual subscription!
Offer valid from 23-30 Nov 2020. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The upbeat global market mood comes after a top official of the US government’s vaccine development effort said on Sunday that the first vaccines could be given to US healthcare workers and others recommended by mid-December. That outweighed the domestic impact of downgrades by Fitch and Moody’s deeper into junk territory on Friday that the finance minister called painful. S&P Global affirmed its rating on Friday. “Progress on various vaccine developments to protect against Covid-19 are fuelling investor risk-taking, with positioning increasing in perceived higher return assets,” Investec Chief Economist Annabel Bishop said in a note. “While the rand seemingly shrugged off the rating downgrades … market sentiment is highly fickle, and can easily collapse, returning the rand to weaker levels.” South Africa’s public finances were in bad shape before the Covid-19 pandemic and have deteriorated since. This year’s budget deficit is expected to reach more than 15% of gross domestic product. Stocks rose, also spurred by vaccine hopes and a strong half-year performance by index heavyweight Naspers. The benchmark all-share index was up 1.02% to 57,193 points and the blue-chip top 40 companies index was up by 1.19% to 52,534 points. Media and internet giant Naspers, which has close to 30% weight on the two indices, was up 2.4% after e-commerce revenues rose 37% for the year ended September 30. Government bonds weakened, as the yield on the 2030 bond rose 7.5 basis points to 8.89%.