JSE-listed construction group Raubex is increasingly optimistic about the pipeline of new work available in the market and has submitted bids worth R25 billion for Bid Window 5 of the Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Procurement Programme. Raubex CEO Rudolf Fourie said on Monday the group is also excited about the number of public-private partnership (PPP) projects the government has brought to market and that its SA National Roads Agency (Sanral) order book is now at a record high of R3.26 billion after dropping to only R207.6 million in February 2019. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Read: Infrastructure fund to target private investment Fourie said Raubex has recently priced a number of materials handling contracts in the mining sector, with negotiations to secure this work ongoing, while there are also commercial and housing project opportunities. He said Raubex’s order book grew by 29.2% to R11.74 billion at end-August from R9.08 billion in the previous corresponding period. “This is encouraging news but it’s important to note that we are expecting more awards before the end of this [calendar] year.” Prospects He added that Raubex is in the running for tender awards valued at R8 billion and believes it will be awarded a big portion of this work, provided it complies with all the tender conditions. One possibility is the new Beit Bridge border post project valued at R2.6 billion, where Raubex is the preferred contractor. It’s still waiting for financial close on this tender. “We hope that is going to happen in the next month but it’s not included in our order book,” he said. “Raubex was recently awarded the contract for the upgrade of the N3 from Dardanelles to Lynnfield Park for R1.48 billion as well as some smaller contracts from Sanral. “There are a couple of other Sanral projects that we are in the running for and hopefully on the solar side we will get a fair share of the R25 billion in bids we have submitted for the renewable energy programme. Traditionally we get a fair share of that work,” he said. Fourie said that if the PPP projects the government has brought to market get awarded, “it will certainly stimulate the market and hopefully we will get a piece of it”. He said these PPP projects are substantial, with all of them valued at about R1 billion. Read: Finance institutions commit ‘tens of billions’ to infrastructure However, Fourie admitted that traditionally the government takes a long time to award PPPs and there is uncertainty about when these projects are going to happen. However, PPPs make a lot of sense, particularly because they are a way for government to fund these projects. Fourie said the major planned PPPs are: “We are quite excited about the medium- to long-term possibilities of PPPs in South Africa,” he said. Read: Infrastructure a key part of economic recovery plan – Ramaphosa Minister of Public Works and Infrastructure Patricia de Lille confirmed in August that the government is reviewing the PPP legislation and that PPPs should be used more to draw in the private sector to deliver on the government’s planned R2.3 trillion infrastructure investment programme. Equity stakes in projects Raubex finance director James Gibson said the company is not looking to be a big equity player in the PPP market and prefers to be the contractor. However, some of these projects require the contractor to take a small equity stake. “So typically it might be a 5% or 10% stake and per project it might be around the R100 million mark or maybe less. It’s not big money we will be putting into equity from the projects we have seen at this stage.” Raubex plans to reduce its exposure to work in Africa, which in the past comprised about 30% of the group’s order book. Fourie said the group has adopted a more conservative strategy to tendering for work in Africa and will only consider projects with suitable risk and reward profiles. He said this change in strategy has been driven by the fact that [African projects] have become a big portion of the group’s bad debt book in the past few years and it has also been struggling to get into countries on the continent. “And now post Covid-19, it’s going to be very difficult to operate in Africa. “We have taken the approach that there are a lot of opportunities in South Africa, with PPPs, Sanral and solar, where we are going to concentrate our focus,” he said. Interim results Fourie said the financial results of all three of Raubex’s divisions were severely impacted by the Covid-19 lockdown in the six months to end-August. This resulted in Raubex on Monday reporting a 145.4% reduction in headline earnings per share to a loss of 26.6 cents from earnings of 58.6 cents in the previous corresponding period. Revenue dropped 10.5% to R3.94 billion and operating profit by 90% to R21.7 million, with the group operating profit margin deteriorating to 0.6% from 4.9%. Cash generated from operations was up 72.4% to R715 million from R414.8 million. Fourie said this is good news and attributed this to the group being able to collect its debt in the period and the cash preservation measures introduced at the start of the lockdown, including the decision to not pay a dividend for the year to end-February. Raubex declared an interim dividend of 24 cents per share for the six months to end-August. ‘Positive view on the stock’ Marc Ter Mors, the global head of equity research at SBG Securities, said on Monday that the overall results by Raubex, particularly the strong growth in its order book, are “very encouraging”. Ter Mors said Raubex is becoming more confident about several areas of expansion, while its Australian business is still doing well, which should be helpful. He said Raubex’s management can make the decision about taking a far more risk-based approach to Africa, which will probably diminish the contribution of Africa to 5% to 10% of group revenue, because of improving prospects for infrastructure spending in South Africa and Australia. “It supports our positive view on the stock, which we have been expressing now to investors for about two years. It’s good to finally see some of the promises of infrastructure spending coming back into the picture.” Shares in Raubex rose 1.48% on Monday to close at R20.52. 