South Africa’s outgoing Auditor-General (AG) Kimi Makwetu passed away earlier on Wednesday. “It is with great sadness and shock that we announce the passing of Auditor-General Kimi Makwetu this afternoon (Wednesday),” his office confirmed in a statement. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. “Mr Makwetu passed away in hospital. He was diagnosed with stage four lung cancer in 2018. “As the national audit office, we join the Makwetu family in mourning his death… We ask the public to keep the family in their thoughts as they come to terms with his passing, and to give them the privacy and space to deal with his passing,” the AG’s office noted. “When they are ready, the family will share details of how they would like to honour their beloved husband and father,” it said. Read: Makwetu flags UIF Ters/Sassa benefits paid to government officials Makwetu was due to end his seven-year term as AG this month. Deputy AG Tsakani Maluleke is expected to take on the top AG post, after she received the backing of Parliament’s ad hoc committee in October. According to the AGSA, Makwetu completed a Social Sciences degree at the University of Cape Town in 1989. He received a BCompt Honours degree from the University of Natal and was a qualified chartered accountant. He started his career with Standard Bank and later worked at Nampak. He completed his articles at Deloitte, moving to senior management before joining Liberty and Metropolitan Life. He later returned to Deloitte as a director in its forensic unit before being appointed Deputy Auditor-General at the AGSA. Makwetu leaves behind a wife and three children.