South Africa’s main stock gauge extended gains on Monday, to rise as much as 2.8% to the highest since August 6, after progress in the development of a coronavirus vaccine sparked a rally across financial markets. “The announcement of a highly effective vaccine removes some of the long-held concerns that the economic disruption caused by the Covid-19 pandemic would persist indefinitely,” says Lester Davids, an investment strategist at Sharenet Securities. “On this basis, we are seeing mass buying across most risk assets, in both developed and emerging markets.” Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The gains come as markets cheer the “certainty around the US presidential election” after Joe Biden’s win, Davids says. Some investors speculate that Biden’s victory could deliver a better trade relationship with US-China and another economic stimulus package could be in store. “To a certain extent it may also be driven by some short covering by market participants who may have anticipated that the outcome of the election would lead to selling pressure,” Davids says. The dollar weakened as investors dumped haven assets after Pfizer’s announcement, driving the rand up 2.5%. Read: Pfizer’s Covid vaccine prevents 90% of infections in study Highlights from several sectors: Rand gains lifted the index for bank stocks up 8.9 to a five-month high. Food and drug sellers rose 7.3%, while general retailers were up 3%. Gold stocks dragged the index for mining stocks down 0.2%, as Pfizer’s announcement saw investors piling into risk assets and dumping havens. The sub-index for gold stocks was down 9.5%, as bullion fell 2.4%.  Platinum companies fell 3.8%.