Its rebrand, two years in the making, has enabled Mazars to rearticulate its purpose, promise and position globally. The firm has come a long way since it was established in Rouen, France in 1945 by Robert Mazars. It has doubled in size in the past decade and is now represented in 90 countries and territories. Hervé Hélias, CEO and chair of the Mazars Group, says the new brand reflects what the firm has become and aspired to be. “In 75 years, our guiding principles haven’t changed, but our firm has.” These guiding principles are to remain caring, modern, confident and approachable. Mazars currently serves 30% of the listed companies in France and China, offering its services to almost 140 large listed companies. “At the same time we serve over 50 000 privately-owned and family businesses – from private clients and start-ups to mature international clients,” says Hélias. The firm is internationally recognised for its highly responsive teams, who are fully engaged and able to work seamlessly together. Some of its partnerships with clients in South Africa span over 50 years. “We bring a personalised approach into our client interactions, whether we are working with an entrepreneur who is just starting or with an established or JSE-listed company,” says co-CEO of Mazars South Africa, Anoop Ninan. State of affairs The firm has experienced steady and balanced growth while continuing with its global expansion, ensuring a strong position in the market place. Recent figures show that the Mazars group recorded a revenue of €1.8 billion (2018/2019), up 10.4% on the previous reporting period. The increase in revenue during 2019 was supported by a strong 9% organic growth. Mazars continues to invest in audit expertise as well as technology and quality control to ensure a healthy and sustainable audit industry. The industry needs technical and regulatory innovations and consistency in quality standards. Nearly half of the firm’s work centres on the audit function. However, over the years a range of other services in accounting, tax, legal, consulting and financial advisory was developed and introduced. “We are convinced that this diversity of expertise is highly relevant to businesses, whatever their size. They all need to navigate complex regulatory markets and to grow in a sustainable manner,” says Hélias. Future sustainability The firm remains deeply committed to sustainable growth and has been involved in a survey on financial regulatory changes aimed at tackling climate change. The survey was done in collaboration with the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum. More than 30 central banks and regulatory authorities across the world participated. The survey revealed that 70% of central banks now see climate change as a “major threat” to financial stability. More than half of the central banks are monitoring climate change risks and 27% are actively responding to the risks. Some of the measures that will be implemented going forward include assessing climate risk as a financial risk in stress tests; encouraging or even mandating climate-related financial disclosures; and setting sustainability criteria standards for green financing or lending by regulated banks. Although the inclusion of climate risks as a financial risk in stress tests is still in its infancy, it is set to soar. Nearly 80% of the respondents in the survey said they intend doing so in the future. Mazars strongly believes in investing in education and youth employment projects in the communities where it is active. It has pioneered a Youth Employment Service (YES) programme in South Africa and trained and placed more than 200 young people in first-time employment. It is also a key supporter of the Thuthuka Education Upliftment Fund, an initiative of the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants, to grow the number of chartered accountants in SA and to transform the demographics of the profession to match those of the country. The firm’s commitment to gender equality and transformation is reflected in the 60% female representation in the South African practice and the fact that 60% of new recruits are employment equity candidates. Expectations gap Society’s expectations of business have evolved over the years, which has brought new challenges to the firm and its clients. Several corporate scandals and the ostensible/superficial delivery of quality audits by many firms have left the industry in a state of reputational flux. It has widened the gap between public expectations and what the profession has delivered. Mazars recognises the urgent need for a collective reflection of the role of all stakeholders – management, directors, audit committees, internal and external auditors – to ensure the quality of audits. The expectations gap has to close in order to live up to the firm’s purpose. “Our purpose speaks directly to caring about the integrity of our profession. As a firm we are invested in meeting client and public expectations in a manner that holds true to our values,” says co-CEO of Mazars South Africa, Michelle Olckers. “It is vital that financial institutions now collaborate and pull together with regulatory authorities and professional bodies to work towards a more sustainable future for all,” he concludes. Brought to you by Mazars in South Africa.