JSE-listed construction group WBHO plans to retain a presence in Australia, even if it decides to dispose of Probuild – the group’s Australian building business. Two material loss-making projects in Australia resulted in WBHO on Tuesday reporting an unprecedented loss after tax of R508 million in the year to end-June 2020, compared with the R549 million after-tax profit achieved in the previous year. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Read: WBHO’s annual results statement on Sens Operating profit before non-trading items reversed from a profit of R561 million in WHBO’s 2019 financial year, to an operating loss of R541 million at end-June 2020, due to the additional expected losses provided for on the Western Roads Upgrade (WRU) project in Melbourne, the loss-making 443 Queen Street project in Brisbane, and R396 million in potentially unrecoverable costs arising from Covid-19. Down under The WRU project within WBHO’s Australian infrastructure business and the 443 Queen Street Project within Probuild were largely responsible for WBHO reporting the loss after tax. The operating loss from the Australian infrastructure and engineering business increased to R1.1 billion in the year to June (2019: R557 million), as the total forecast loss on the WRU project increased by A$82 million during the year to A$133 million. An amount of A$54 million was transferred to Australia from the South African operations during the reporting period to support the funding of the WRU Project. A further amount of A$34 million was sent after the reporting period, increasing the total funding from South Africa to A$100 million. WBHO Group CEO Wolfgang Neff said on Tuesday that an additional A$20 million is expected to flow from the South African operations to Australia in the second half of WBHO’s 2021 financial year to close out the WRU project. WBHO said Probuild has sufficient cash reserves to fund the losses being incurred on 443 Queen Street and also injected an amount of A$14 million into the infrastructure business over the course of the year to assist with the funding of WRU. Neff believes the Australian infrastructure business is a “fit” for the WBHO group. Listen: Neff talks to Nompu Siziba about WBHO’s losses and its Australian projects  Staying put for now He said the infrastructure business that WBHO will be retaining operates predominantly out of Perth, is a small business and it does not target massive public private partnerships (PPPs) like the WRU project. “It’s predominantly construct-only jobs and it has consistently performed reasonably over the last few years. We think that business is a fit. Yes the time difference is a bit of a pain but I think we can control it. “The jobs are also overseeable. There are not hundreds of jobs but a handful, and one can control that from here [South Africa],” he said. WBHO Chairman Louwtjie Nel added that the infrastructure business has been successfully run for the past eight to 10 years by Will Grobler, a former WBHO director from South Africa. Nel said the real problem is the WRU project and other projects in Queensland and Victoria. “We will not be taking on those types of risk going forward and it will be run by Grobler and we (will) see how it goes in the next year or two if we stay in the market,” he said. Nel added that WBHO has two months to go on the WRU project, is “pretty confident” on the cost and hopes it will not see any further losses from this project. Probuild WBHO advised shareholders in June 2020 that it had received an unsolicited indicative, non-binding and conditional proposal from a major international construction and civil services company to acquire the group’s interest in Probuild. Read: WBHO expects massive earnings slump, gets unsolicited bid for Probuild Neff said this transaction has not been completed and, in the event that WBHO is left only with its infrastructure business in western Australia, “we will keep it for now”. WBHO financial director Charles Henwood said WBHO has received numerous unsolicited approaches for Probuild over recent years and was prompted to engage with the latest unsolicited proposal because the emerging increased size and complexity of projects in Australia presents a growing risk to the South African balance sheet to support the future of the Australian building businesses. Henwood said in principle, agreement was reached on the majority of the key terms to be included in the transaction documents after the end of the reporting period. “While negotiations are materially advanced, the proposed transaction remains subject to the finalisation and execution of the binding transaction documentation as well as various counter-party, regulatory and shareholder approvals,” he said. Despite the substantial losses incurred by the group during the year to June 2020, cash generated from operations remained healthy, amounting to R790 million compared with R1.5 billion in the previous year. Henwood said the group’s cash and cash equivalents increased to R7.59 billion at end-June 2020 from R5.9 billion in the previous year, adding the group’s substantial cash reserves will allow WBHO to adequately manage its liquidity position. WBHO’s group order book declined by 25% to R35.36 billion at end-June 2020 from R47.3 billion in the previous year.
Neff said the impact of Covid-19 is clearly visible in the diminished order at end-June 2020 but there had been a noticeable uptick in activity, with R9.8 billion in new project awards between September and November 2020, while R8 billion in imminent new awards over the next three months will strengthen the order book further. A ‘good company’ Peregrine Capital executive chair David Fraser said the “sooner they get out of Australia, the better”. Fraser said WBHO needs to focus back on its home base and is lucky it has a strong balance sheet. “There are not many companies that can take a R1.5 billion-project loss and still have net cash, which they can.” He added that WBHO has never been a company that has come back with continued losses on the same contract, which is a disappointment because it tells you that it has not assessed it correctly. “Having said that, I still think they are a good company; they do generally perform good construction contracts and know what they are doing.”