West Africa-focused Endeavour Mining has agreed to buy Teranga Gold in an all-share deal to create a top 10 gold producer with an aim to list in London, the companies said on Monday, a week after they announced they were in talks. The agreement is a breakthough for the fragmented gold sector and for Endeavour, whose previous attempt at a major merger failed. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. A London listing would plug a gap left by Randgold’s departure following its merger with Barrick completed at the start of 2019. But with investors jittery about pricey takeover deals after a surge in gold prices, Endeavour’s shares fell after the two said they were in talks. Endeavour shareholders will get 66% of the combined entity, with Teranga shareholders holding the remaining 34%. Teranga will get three seats on the board to Endeavour’s seven. Endeavour will pay 0.470 of its own shares for each Teranga share, a 5.1% premium based on Friday’s closing prices – valuing Teranga, whose shares are up 97% this year, at 2.6 billion Canadian dollars ($1.99 billion). “Teranga had a very strong run over the past 12 months, so we’re not trying to buy cheap – we’re just trying to make the right deal that satisfies both sets of shareholders and that ensures the maximum support and maximum return going forward,” Endeavour CEO Sébastien de Montessus said in a telephone interview. De Montessus said Barrick Gold, which holds 11.44% of Teranga shares, supported the deal. Barrick CEO Mark Bristow has been calling for consolidation to get rid of weaker players. Endeavour will seek to list in London in 2021 as the largest premium pure gold producer in that market, eventually targeting entry into the FTSE 100 index. Endeavour’s acquisition of Teranga adds another operating mine – Wahgnion – to its four existing mines in Burkina Faso, and also gives it exposure to Senegal with the Massawa project, which Teranga bought from Barrick Gold last year. Talks in 2019 with Egypt-focused Centamin failed to deliver a deal, although Endeavour successfully bought Semafo in March, creating the biggest gold producer in Burkina Faso. The Teranga merger will create a group with average annual production of more than 1.5 million ounces per year, with a production cost of around $850 per ounce. “The merger would further embed Endeavour as the largest gold miner in west Africa, while adding long-term production from a lower-risk jurisdiction (Senegal) to provide some balance against the group’s relatively heavy weighting towards Burkina Faso,” said Berenberg analysts. Burkina Faso is battling an Islamist insurgency in its eastern borderlands with Mali and Niger. Militants attacked a convoy of mineworkers near the Boungou mine a year ago, killing at least 37 civilians. Boungou was operated then by Semafo, but now forms part of Endeavour’s portfolio. De Montessus, who has overseen Boungou’s restart and a security overhaul, said support from France’s Barkhane forces has improved the security situation. La Mancha, Egyptian billionaire Naguib Sawiris’ gold mining holding company and Endeavour’s top shareholder, has committed to a $200 million cash injection into the new entity. Endeavour and Teranga also negotiated debt refinancing as part of the deal.