Coronavirus deaths and new infections worldwide surged by daily records, almost one year after the disease emerged, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. The virus continued to rage in America as Wisconsin reported record cases and said hospitals are at or near capacity. Daily infections reached a five-month high in New Jersey, and Texas had the most new cases since August. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. In Europe, Greece is nearing a lockdown and Italy enacted curbs in Milan and Turin. Belgium reported record hospital admissions, and Austrian infections hit a daily high. A new strain of Covid-19 emerged after an outbreak in Denmark’s mink population, potentially hampering efforts to develop a vaccine. Key Developments: Record Deaths and Infections (11:33 a.m. HK) Daily coronavirus deaths worldwide set a new record of more than 10,000, while global infections passed 600,000 in a day for the first time as the pandemic gathered pace, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. Hokkaido Outbreak Grows (10:25 a.m. HK) Infections in Japan’s northern-most prefecture Hokkaido, where cases have spiked since October, may break through 100 for the first time today, according to local broadcaster FNN. Hokkaido’s governor and the mayor for the prefecture’s biggest city met Wednesday to discuss possible restrictions, such as asking restaurants in the city’s nightlife district to shorten operating hours in exchange for subsidies, FNN reported. China Suspends Entry for UK Visas (9:10 a.m. HK) China will temporarily suspend entry by non-Chinese UK nationals who hold valid visas or residence permits, the Chinese Embassy in the UK said in a statement. The suspension is in response to the Covid-19 outbreak and will be assessed as it evolves, the embassy said. Entry by holders of diplomatic, service or C visas won’t be affected, it said. Denver Mulls Tighter Rules (8:15 a.m. HK) Denver is considering “more tools to restrict gatherings and avoid a stay-at-home order,” said Theresa Marchetta, spokeswoman for Denver Mayor Michael Hancock. “It’s safe to say everything is on the table.” Pueblo, the ninth-largest city in the state, last week imposed a two-week, overnight curfew. UK May Unveil Furlough Details (7:33 a.m. HK) The UK is expected to unveil details of a wage support program Thursday, amid calls for more generous help for people who can’t work due to coronavirus restrictions. The Treasury announced Saturday it would extend furlough payments at 80% of employee wages until December 2 to support workers during a second lockdown that starts Thursday. Chancellor of the Exchequer Rishi Sunak is due to announce further extending the program beyond Dec. 2 in areas under the highest levels of restrictions, the Sun newspaper said. Australia signs vaccine pacts (5:43 p.m. NY) Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison said the government has reached agreements for Novavax to supply 40 million vaccine doses and a Pfizer/BioNTech partnership to provide 10 million vaccine doses. The agreements mean that Australia has now secured access to four Covid-19 vaccines and more than 134 million doses, with total investment of A$3.2 billion ($2.3 billion). Texas Cases Surge by Most in Three Months (5:15 pm ET) Texas recorded more than 9 000 new cases in a 24-hour period, the steepest daily increase since Aug. 4, according to state health department figures. The jump pushed the cumulative total to 926 400. More than 18 000 Texans have perished from the virus. Statewide, hospitalisations hovered just below 6 000 — an 84% surge in the past month, the data showed. The strain on medical centres and emergency field hospitals continues to worsen in the hotspots of El Paso, Lubbock, Amarillo and Laredo. Wisconsin in ‘Crisis’ as Hospitals Fill (5 p.m. NY) Covid-19 continues to spread rapidly across the US Midwest, resulting in rising infection rates and increased stress on medical services. Wisconsin recorded a record 5,935 new cases on Wednesday. Neighbouring Illinois reported 7,538 infections within the last 24 hours. “Hospitals are at or near capacity and their options are limited when it comes to the need for more beds and admissions,” Andrea Palm, secretary designee of the Wisconsin Department of Health Services, told reporters on Wednesday. “We are in a crisis in this state.” Italy Targets Milan, Turin in Clampdown (4 p.m. NY) Italy targeted the financial capital of Milan and key industrial hubs in the north with a set of tough new restrictions. Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte said Wednesday that the northern region of Lombardy around Milan, as well as Piedmont and its capital Turin, fall into the country’s highest-risk zones. That will trigger measures restricting people to the cities and towns where they live starting Friday. Unlike last spring’s national lockdown, industrial operations will remain open even in the worst-hit zones in an attempt to shield the economy. The new decree runs from Friday to Dec. 3, with the toughest restrictions imposed for a period of at least 15 days. French ICU Use at Highest Since April (3:20 p.m. NY) France reported an additional 385 coronavirus deaths on Wednesday, while the use rate of intensive-care unit beds reached the highest level since late April. Confirmed infections increased by 40,558 to 1.54 million, French health authorities reported. The seven-day average of new cases, which smooths out weekly fluctuations, rose to 44,027. Greece Heads Toward Lockdown (2 p.m. NY) Greece is heading to a national lockdown after reporting Wednesday 2,646 new Covid-19 cases in the past 24 hours, a second-straight daily record increase. Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis met with medical advisers Wednesday and will make announcements Thursday on national TV on confronting the virus. Experts advised the government to impose a national lockdown for 30 days and the premier will “take health experts’ proposals into account,” Health Minister Vasilis Kikilias said in an interview with ANT1 TV. Greece also reported 18 more deaths in the past 24 hours, while the occupancy rate of intensive-care units stands at 63%. England Locks Down (11:15 a.m. NY) UK lawmakers approved a new four-week lockdown starting Thursday to control the spread of the disease in England. Prime Minister Boris Johnson warned of “mortality on a grievous scale” if parliament failed to approve the plan. The UK reported 492 additional deaths from coronavirus within 28 days of a positive test on Wednesday, the highest daily increase since its second surge in the disease. Yvonne Doyle, medical director of Public Health England, said those restrictions will take some time to have an impact. “Sadly we know that the trend in deaths will continue to rise over the next few weeks,” Doyle said. Denmark Finds New Strain in Minks (10:47 a.m. NY) Denmark has found a new strain of Covid-19 after an outbreak in the country’s mink population led to a mutation of the virus that might hamper efforts to develop a vaccine. Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen said “there is a risk that the effect of a future vaccine will be weakened or, in a worst case scenario, be undermined,” during a virtual press briefing on Wednesday. Her government has passed on the information to the World Health Organization, and now plans to cull Denmark’s entire mink population. According to Kopenhagen Fur, an auction house owned by Denmark’s mink breeders, 16 million animals are raised each year. © 2020 Bloomberg