The Elders, a group of prominent former world leaders, voiced concern on Thursday at US President Donald Trump’s refusal to concede electoral defeat, saying it showed disrespect for the integrity of American democracy. The group was founded by late former South African President Nelson Mandela and is now chaired by former Irish President Mary Robinson. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. It includes Mandela’s widow Graca Machel, former UN Secretary-General Ban ki-moon, Nobel Peace Prize-winning former presidents of Colombia and Liberia, and an array of other former world leaders. Former US President Jimmy Carter is an emeritus member. Trump’s position was “putting at risk the functioning of American democracy”, the group said, calling for him to accept the verdict of the ballot box. Trump has focused on efforts to overturn the November 3 election’s results in closely contested states, despite presenting no evidence of irregularities that could affect the outcome, and a skeptical reception from judges. “The continued assertions of electoral fraud by the President and some senior members of the Administration and of the Republican Party, offered as yet without any compelling evidence, convey a lack of respect for the integrity and independence of the democratic and legal institutions of the United States,” the Elders said in a statement. “Those who stand to benefit from the current impasse are autocratic rulers and malign actors who wish to undermine democracy and the rule of law across the world.” Robinson, who served as UN human rights chief, noted that The Elders had previously commented on “volatile and undemocratic situations in states such as Kenya, Sri Lanka and Zimbabwe”.