Aviation company Comair has reopened bookings for domestic British Airways’ flights. In a statement released on Monday it said it plans to begin serving all domestic British Airways’ routes it previously operated from December 9. “Regional services will be reintroduced as it ramps up to full operations over the next few months.” Black Friday SpecialGet 15% discount on our annual subscription!
Offer valid from 23-30 Nov 2020. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Comair operates scheduled services on domestic routes as a British Airways franchisee, as well as under its own kulula.com brand. Bookings on kulula.com were reopened on November 1, with flights planned to resume on December 1. Read: Comair to start flying on December 1 Domestic SLOW lounges will also reopen, initially at King Shaka International, Cape Town International and OR Tambo International. Other lounges will reopen as the flight schedule expands. Glenn Orsmond, representing the Comair Rescue Consortium, said it’s now able to offer bookings on a “considerably expanded schedule” and that customers can book in business class. He says that the airline will at first operate a fleet of 15 aircraft across both its airline brands, and then gradually increase this number as the remainder of the fleet returns to service over the next few months. Customers who booked tickets before Comair went into business rescue will be able to use the value of their tickets through the Comair Travel Bank for future Comair travel from mid-January onwards. Confidence returning “British Airways’ ongoing support is a huge vote of confidence in the future of Comair,” says Orsmond. Comair went into business rescue on May 5, after being forced to shutdown during the hard lockdown toward the end of March. Comair’s return operations comes after its creditors and shareholders voted to adopt its business rescue plan on September 18, with R500 million injected into the group. This move will see it eventually delist from the JSE. At the end of October, the Competition Tribunal approved a rescue deal for Comair on condition that it halts job cuts for three years and that investors allocate shares to a special purpose black empowerment vehicle. Read: Competition Tribunal approves Comair rescue deal