When Iain Williamson took over as chief executive officer of Old Mutual four months ago, Africa’s largest insurer was being hammered from all sides. The Cape Town-based financial-services firm was contending with the economic fallout of a strict lockdown to contain the spread of the coronavirus, a spike in claims, and tumultuous global capital markets. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Old Mutual CEO Iain Williamson Its reputation had been hurt by an acrimonious legal spat that saw Williamson’s predecessor suspended, locked out of his office and fired, twice. This after Old Mutual had already gained notoriety as the South African company that embarked on a global expansion by moving its headquarters to London in 1999, only to unwind it all and retreat home in 2018. Now, the 50-year-old is adding flesh to a strategy refresh started with the board last year — even amid the tussle with ex-CEO Peter Moyo. Williamson is seen as a safe pair of hands, having joined the group about 30 years ago and acting in the top post since May last year. In that time, five CEOs came and went. Here are some highlights from a wide-ranging interview with Williamson to discuss topics from his transition into the role to dividend payouts: South African market  Going digital The 175-year-old firm is in talks with fintech players to create an ecosystem that will make it easier for customers to add more products. It’s also working on taking its entire business digital, has already deployed 151 robots to cut processing times, and equipped advisers with the technology they need to function when they can’t physically meet clients. The insurer has partnered with Amazon Web Services to modernise its technology, launched a fresh website and a new app. CEO transition “It’s been a strange transition” with the change from interim CEO to having the job permanently. The announcement was made on a Friday and he officially started on the Monday, July 6. But nothing much had changed. “All the meetings are the same, the diary is already set up in advance. Your time horizon does shift slightly in having confirmation it’s a longer-term appointment, so that’s been good.”  Dividend forecast After deferring its interim dividend, Old Mutual will continue to monitor developments in coming months before making a recommendation to the board. “We don’t have any lack of confidence around the strength of the balance sheet.” “We’re reasonably optimistic we should be in a position to do something.” Old Mutual’s shares climbed as much as 5% and were trading up 4.2% as of 10:42 a.m. in Johannesburg, leading gains on the five-member South African life insurance index. © 2020 Bloomberg