Asian stocks began the week with gains alongside European and US equity futures as traders took solace from progress toward a vaccine and signs of a recovering global economy. The dollar dipped. South Korean equities outperformed Monday after encouraging trade data, putting the Kospi index on course for a record close. S&P 500 futures rose along with Asia-Pacific shares, while global equities remain within a whisker of the all-time high set earlier this month. Black Friday SpecialGet 15% discount on our annual subscription!
Offer valid from 23-30 Nov 2020. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Vaccinations against Covid-19 in the US will “hopefully” start in less than three weeks, according to the head of the federal government’s program to accelerate a vaccine. Japan is shut for a holiday and Treasuries won’t trade until the London open.  Successes in vaccine trials have bolstered hopes for the eventual rollout of effective shots across the world, though some investor optimism has been tempered by a continuing surge in coronavirus cases and deaths in many regions, including the US. “There is a lot of enthusiasm over the vaccine news and rightly so — as soon as we can get something that is very effective distributed widely, the sooner we can get back to ordinary life,” Brian Jacobsen, multi-asset strategist at Wells Fargo Asset Management, said on Bloomberg TV. “The problem, from our perspective, is we first have to get through winter and this is setting us up for some downside economic surprises.” There are growing predictions the Federal Reserve will unveil more monetary action when it meets in mid-December, after the central bank said it will comply with a Treasury Department request to return unused funds meant to backstop five emergency lending programs. The Telegraph reported the UK will announce Monday that quarantine restrictions will ease in time for Christmas, while the French government plans a three-phase reduction in lockdown measures from next month. Hong Kong and Singapore delayed a travel bubble after cases spiked in Hong Kong. Here are some key events coming up: These are the main moves in markets: