Former South African President Jacob Zuma walked out of a judicial panel probing corruption during his tenure in violation of a summons after failing to persuade the inquiry’s chairman to recuse himself. Zuma left the hearing during an adjournment on Thursday without requesting Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo’s permission. The judge said the transgression was “a serious matter,” but didn’t specify whether the former head of state would be sanctioned. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. “He was going to be asked to take the witness stand,” Zondo said before adjourning public hearings until next week. “The commission will reflect on the matters it needs to reflect on. It is going to continue with its work.” Earlier, Zondo dismissed Zuma’s application that he recuse himself and denied the former president’s claims that they had a close personal or professional relationship, or that his conduct indicated that he was biased against the former president. “The application for my recusal” is dismissed, Zondo said in his ruling. President Cyril Ramaphosa, who succeeded Zuma in February 2018, has estimated that more than R500 billion ($32 billion) was stolen from state coffers during Zuma’s nine-year rule. While Zuma denies any wrongdoing, he has persistently frustrated efforts to investigate the allegations. At least 34 other witnesses who’ve testified before Zondo’s panel implicated the former president in the embezzlement of state funds. Zuma appeared before the panel last year, but withdrew from proceedings after his lawyers objected to the line of questioning and argued that he was being unfairly cross-examined. Zondo then subpoenaed him to testify. Muzi Sikhakhane, Zuma’s lawyer, earlier said his client would take the decision on review and would withdraw from the hearings. “You have become a judge in the dispute that involves yourself,” he told Zondo. Paul Pretorius, the head of the panel’s legal team, said proceedings should continue notwithstanding a review, and Zuma would be in violation of his summons if he unilaterally withdrew. Zuma left the hearing during an adjournment without requesting Zondo’s permission. The judge said the transgression was “a serious matter,” but didn’t specify whether Zuma would be sanctioned. “He was going to be asked to take the witness stand,” Zondo said before adjourning public hearings until next week. “The commission will reflect on the matters it needs to reflect on. It is going to continue with its work.”