South Africa’s Tsogo Sun Gaming swung to a R543 million ($35.1 million) headline loss in the six months ended September 30, as traffic at its casinos fell due to government restrictions to curb the spread of Covid-19. The owner of Montecasino and theme park Gold Reef City had reported headline earnings of R708 million in the same period of 2019. Tsogo also did not declare an interim dividend. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. “Government’s regulatory restrictions such as the curfew, limited capacity and ban on alcohol sales, had a substantial negative impact on the results for this interim reporting period,” the company said. All businesses in the group were closed for the first quarter of the financial period, which started in April, and thereafter opened in a staggered manner, but are not as yet fully operational, Tsogo added. Management does not expect a significant contribution from entertainment facilities such as the theme park, theatres, arcades and cinemas for this financial year. Overall income plunged by 74% to R1.6 billion from R5.9 billion, while earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation sunk by 90%. In October, the businesses delivered a “solid” performance and a further improvement as a result of the relaxation of the curfew. “With reduced levels of revenue due to restricted trading, offset by a lower cost base, only essential capex to be spent and no dividends paid to shareholders, we are of the view that debt levels can be reduced significantly by September 2021,” Tsogo added. Net interest-bearing debt and guarantees totalled R11.8 billion as at September 30, R400 million above the March 31 balance. The group still requires a waiver for expected covenant breaches for March 2021 and it is possible that it may also require waivers for September 2021, the casino operator said.