A rally in global equities cooled Wednesday as investors balanced optimism spurred by vaccine and political developments against a challenging economic outlook amid the pandemic. The dollar steadied. A gauge of Asia-Pacific shares gave up an earlier climb of about 1%. South Korean and Chinese stocks turned lower, while those in Japan posted modest gains. US and European futures ticked higher. The S&P 500 index earlier closed at a record and the Dow Jones Industrial Average topped 30,000. Treasury yields dipped, oil held above $45 a barrel and copper touched the highest since 2014. Black Friday SpecialGet 15% discount on our annual subscription!
Offer valid from 23-30 Nov 2020. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership.  Positive vaccine news as well as the formal start of President-elect Joe Biden’s transition to power — including the selection of Janet Yellen as Treasury secretary — have fueled optimism about the outlook. At the same time, restrictions to curb surging coronavirus infections threaten to impede the global economic recovery. The MSCI gauge of global shares remains up about 13% in November, set for the best month since it began in 1988. Next up Wednesday comes a slew of US economic indicators, from jobless claims to readings on consumer confidence and personal income. Minutes of the most recent Federal Open Market Committee meeting are also due. “Now, there’s big event risk up ahead: FOMC minutes,” said Ilya Spivak, head Asia-Pacific strategist at DailyFX. “So markets don’t seem keen on follow-through. The worry is that the Fed will continue to signal that they’re keeping to a hands-off posture. No tightening, but no new easing either.” Elsewhere, Bitcoin retreated after topping $19,000. In Europe, bank stocks will be in focus after a report that eurozone banks may be able to resume dividend payments next year if their balance sheets are strong enough to survive the pandemic. Here are some key events coming up: These are the main moves in markets: 