European stocks fluctuated and US stock futures were mixed as a slew of sobering economic data deflated a spirited risk rally. Bitcoin tumbled 8%. Cyclical companies including banks and energy firms that had led the post-vaccine surge retreated while more defensive tech shares gained. That was mirrored by equity futures in the US, where contracts on the main gauge were flat while those on the tech-heavy Nasdaq 100 rose. Black Friday SpecialGet 15% discount on our annual subscription!
Offer valid from 23-30 Nov 2020. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Even with three successful vaccines on the table, sentiment turned cautious Thursday as the virus toll continued to rise in Europe and the US, leading German Chancellor Angela Merkel to call on Europe’s ski resorts to close this winter. The task of a global vaccination comes with logistical problems, all while the virus gains ground and economic recoveries wobble. “Question marks still surround the speed of a global roll-out and the proportion of populations willing to be vaccinated,” Geir Lode, head of global equities at the international business of Federated Hermes, wrote in a note to clients. “These factors, combined with a second consecutive week of rising jobless claims in the US, appear to have brought the rotation into value and back-to-work stocks grinding to a halt for now.”  Meanwhile, Treasury futures edged higher as the cash market is closed, with traders off for Thanksgiving holiday in the US. A deluge of data on Wednesday brought the first back-to-back rise in weekly US jobless claims since July and a widening trade deficit. Investors took some solace from the minutes out of the Federal Reserve’s latest meeting, which showed the central bank discussed at the November 4-5 meeting providing more guidance on its bond-buying strategy “fairly soon” but didn’t see a need for immediate adjustments. Elsewhere, Asian shares saw modest gains. West Texas Intermediate crude dipped toward $45 a barrel. In cryptocurrencies, Bitcoin and Ethereum plunged following their recent surge. Here are some key events coming up: Here are the main moves in markets: