Treasuries jumped, the dollar climbed and US equity futures pushed higher as early tallies suggested the outcome of the American presidential election could be closer than polls had suggested. Benchmark Treasury yields swung wildly, falling at one point below 0.8% after earlier surpassing 0.9%. The dollar advanced the most since June after erasing losses. S&P 500 futures swung between gains and losses before climbing, while a surge in Nasdaq 100 contracts triggered a brief trading halt. The offshore yuan and Mexican peso retreated and gold fell. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Joe Biden scored initial wins in traditionally Democratic states in the eastern US while President Donald Trump won Republican strongholds in the south and Midwest, according to the Associated Press and networks, with key battlegrounds still to be decided. Trump’s strong showing across places like Florida and Ohio appeared to significantly shrink Biden’s path to victory. Follow along here for our real-time news updates and analysis.  Elsewhere, Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. tumbled as much as 9.3% in Hong Kong after China halted the initial public offering of Ant Group Co., in which Alibaba owns about a one-third stake. Asian stocks were mixed with Japan outperforming and Australia lagging. Investors are bracing for the outcome of a divisive election following weeks of speculation that a contested result could roil markets. Heading into Tuesday, polls indicated Biden was ahead of Trump, though the race looked tight in some battleground states. “Early prospects for a quick resolution to the US election have given way to the reality of an extended process, not only with regards to the White House but also the Senate,” said Ian Lyngen, a strategist at BMO Capital Markets. “Volatile price action can only be expected to persist for the time being, at least until the path forward becomes clearer.” EIA crude oil inventory report on Wednesday. These are some key events coming up: These are the main moves in markets: 