Last week was a busy one for the South African retail sector, with Dis-Chem and Foschini both reporting, Mr Price releasing a profit warning, and Truworths giving investors an 18-week sales update. The market has reacted favourably to all these announcements, although we note that there may also be a bit of euphoria around Joe Biden winning the US Presidential Election in these counters. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Below, we highlight the main points coming out of the various retailers’ company updates: Mr Price: Trading statement for the 26 weeks ended September 26, 2020 On Wednesday (November 4), Mr Price released a trading update indicating that its diluted headline earnings per share (dHEPS) are expected to be down by between 23% and 28% YoY for H1 2021, although the group did not provide any further information. Bloomberg consensus expectations are currently looking for Mr Price’s full-year dHEPS to be down by c. 28% YoY. However, we think that, given the fact that H1 2020 overlapped entirely with the lockdown period, this reflects the worst trading environment, and that trading should improve from here. As such, in our view, this trading update bodes well for Mr Price to beat full-year consensus estimates and we expect to see some earnings upgrades over the next few months, as consensus analyst forecasts have been extremely bearish on the SA consumer. Dis-Chem Group: H1 2021 results Dis-Chem reported dHEPS of ZAc36 for the half-year (H1 2021) – up 16% YoY, impacted materially by the Covid-19 pandemic and the subsequent lockdowns. Excluding the costs that were directly caused by Covid, dHEPS would have been ZAc39.8 or up 28.5% YoY. Still, overall, the results were ahead of market and our own expectations. The key to the positive surprise was the pace at which Dis-Chem’s Wholesale division achieved profitability. This division reported an operating profit of R41 million vs a loss of R77 million in FY 2020. Management guidance was cautious, and the company decided not to pay a dividend. We continue to be more constructive on the earnings profile of this company than consensus, but we concede that some question marks remain over whether management can continue to produce positive results. At a forward PE of 26x, the stock is expensive, and we recommend accumulating the share on any price weakness. Highlights: The positives The Wholesale business turned to an operating profit: We should expect a recovery in operating margins in the Retail segment in the next reporting period and in H1 2022. This is as the sales mix normalises and higher-margin products, such as Health and Beauty, make a greater contribution to sales. Acquisitions should start to contribute more meaningfully going forward. We remain constructive on the acquisition of BabyCity and we expect these stores to start contributing to operating profit in H2 2021. Read: Dis-Chem withholds dividends as it eyes health insurance acquisition The negatives The Retail segment experienced a slowdown in trading over the last few months. Trading densities continue to drop from lockdown peaks The Foschini Group: H1 2020 results The period under review (H1 2020) was difficult for The Foschini Group (TFG), with the company reporting a H1 2020 loss per share. All its business units were severely impacted by the lockdowns in their respective jurisdictions. However, we believe that these results will form a base and that the tide will start to turn for TFG. In fact, in our view, there may have been some aggressive markdowns by TFG to clear out inventory in order to start the post-lockdown period afresh. The Jet transaction continues to look like a great opportunity and should start to contribute to the bottom line from day-one. We are, however, concerned about the UK business, with a second lockdown again adversely impacting trading. To compound that, TFG’s retail brands are very exposed to business-, formal- and event wear. We believe that these categories will take longer to normalise post the lockdown. The positives of Jet and the continued momentum in athleisure are counterbalanced by the struggles in the Group’s other business units. At current price levels, the risk/return profile is balanced in our view. The highlights: The positives: The Jet acquisition continues to look like a great deal, in our view. We believe that Jet will enhance TFG’s offering by providing it with access to the value-orientated customer. Athleisure struggled during the lockdowns as it was initially unable to trade and later its products were low on the consumer’s priority list. However, as SA entered level 2 and 1 of the lockdowns, this category has recovered rapidly. TFG continues to invest in its online offering and this sales channel continues to surprise management on the upside. The credit impairment was better than expected. The rights issue has significantly reduced the debt levels of the company, with the debt ratios now far more palatable. The negatives: TFG London continues to struggle. Credit applications fell by 55% over the half-year period. Management are blaming this on lockdowns, but this trend has not been as severe at Truworths or at Mr Price. Truworths: Business update for the first 18 weeks of FY 2021 Truworths provided an 18-week sales update on Thursday (5 November). Group sales decreased by 10% YoY and Bloomberg consensus forecasts are looking for FY 2021 sales to be flat. Truworths Africa experienced a 9% YoY sales decline, with cash sales (-0.1% YoY) outperforming account sales (-13% YoY) over the period. Account holders able to purchase, improved from 77% at the end of FY 2020, to 83%, indicating an improvement in the book quality. Office sales declined by 26%. We note that the sales decline has been moderating in both Truworths Africa and Truworths Office since the company’s nine-week update provided at its last results presentation. At its FY 2020 results presentation, the company said that Truworths Africa experienced a sales decline of 11% YoY, meaning that the next nine weeks saw a sales decline of 7% YoY. At the results, Truworths’ Office segment experienced a sales decline of 30% YoY (in British pound), meaning that the next nine weeks saw a sales decline of 22%. We do not believe that Truworths’ business model of credit-induced sales of higher-margin and more expensive products will thrive in the current economic environment. The share may be cheap, but we continue to prefer the value fashion retailers, with greater cash-sales exposure. Stephán Engelbrecht is a fund manager at Anchor Capital.