The Ford Motor Company of Southern Africa (FMCSA) has kick-started the R135 million first phase of a five-phase renewable energy programme at its Silverton assembly plant in Pretoria, which aims to make the plant 100% carbon neutral and energy self-sufficient by 2024. This phase of Ford’s Project Blue Oval renewable energy programme through a partnership with SolarAfrica, one of South Africa’s leading power purchase agreement providers, involves installing specially developed and locally manufactured solar photovoltaic (PV) carports throughout the facility. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. It will use more than 31 000 solar panels covering 4 200 parking bays to generate 13.5 megawatts (MW) of solar energy, about 30% of the plant’s annual energy requirement. It will be one of the largest solar carports in the world. The first phase of the project will create 100 jobs locally, with the later phases creating employment for an additional 2 400 people. Read: Ford invests around R138m in a new Silverton plant facility Energy island FMCSA vice-president of operations Ockert Berry said on Friday the solar project is the first step towards achieving “island mode” within the next four years, at which point the Silverton assembly plant will no longer rely on the national power grid or any municipal services. The plant produces the Ford Ranger, Ranger Raptor and Everest models for domestic sales and more than 100 global export markets. “Our goal by 2024 is to have the Silverton plant completely energy self-sufficient and 100% carbon neutral, using an integrated renewable and co-generation energy mix comprising solar PV, biomass, biogas and biosyngas for all our electricity, gas and heating requirements. “We will also be introducing 100% water recycling, and all non-fermentable waste will be repurposed through a pyrolysis system to produce syngas,” he said. Berry said this is a bold and pioneering step by Ford in South Africa that will transform its business and help the company to make an important contribution to reduce its impact on the environment. The project will also make the plant more efficient and more cost-competitive. FMCSA corporate communications manager Dudu Nxele said on Friday the total investment by Ford in all five phases of the project could not be disclosed yet. “We will make an announcement each year as we go along,” she said. During the next phases of the project, which are currently being investigated, the vision is to introduce biomass as a source of renewable energy and outsource the farming of fermentable biomass plants in rural areas to support the project. Moneyweb reported in November 2019 that FMCSA would launch the first phase of a renewable energy plan in 2020 to make its Silverton plant completely self-sufficient for all its energy needs. FMCSA MD Neale Hill told Moneyweb on the sidelines of the launch of the Tshwane Automotive Special Economic Zone (SEZ) in November 2019 that FMCSA will be building a biomass plant on a parcel of land that had been identified for this purpose on the existing Ford site in Silverton. Hill did not mention any plans for a solar carport facility at the plant but indicated the biomass plant will be a cactus plant operation, with the organic product grown to supply the material for the biomass plant. “This is actually part of the indirect jobs that we will be creating. We will have farmers who will be establishing a crop, which we will be using to run our biomass plant. It will be grown in and around the Pretoria areas,” he said. Hill added the biomass plant will be outsourced to another company but it will be a dedicated plant to provide for Ford’s energy needs, with electricity fed directly into the plant rather than into the electricity grid. Economist Mike Schüssler said the project is “brilliant” and believes many more companies will be implementing renewable energy projects but the technology will differ from company to company. Schüssler said these projects will make it cheaper for the firms over the long run and “spur more people to do the same”. But Schüssler said it is a problem for Eskom and new electricity suppliers when they do come into the market and people are starting to think about moving off the grid. Schüssler said these renewable energy projects will have an impact on Eskom financially and also hurt the finances of municipalities. “But for the firms, I think it’s a very good thing and I think this is just the start of it. “We are not back at normal power because the economy is still weak but when ArcelorMittal SA’s blast furnaces come back on and all those things, then we are probably back to some form of load shedding,” he said. Ford International Markets Group Director Operations Andrea Cavallaro said the Ford Motor Company has launched clear objectives to address climate change, which compel the company to change its behaviour in profound and lasting ways. He said Ford is the only full-line automaker in the US committed to doing its part to reduce CO2 emissions in line with the Paris Climate Agreement, and is working towards stronger vehicle greenhouse standards to reduce its impact on the environment. “Renewable energy is at the centre of this focused plan to reduce and ultimately eliminate our reliance on fossil fuels while lowering and offsetting the production of CO2 emissions,” he said. Cavallaro said Project Blue Oval in South Africa sets a benchmark for Ford Motor Company’s objective to use 100% locally sourced renewable energy for all its manufacturing plants globally by 2035. “It also takes us one step closer to achieving carbon neutrality globally by 2050 – both for our facilities around the world and within our supply base,” he said. David Sonnenberg, chief technical officer of SolarAfrica and Project Blue Oval, said the solar project is the first step towards addressing South Africa’s energy and environmental challenges. “As we are all too well aware, South Africa is currently faced with a crippling energy crisis, coupled with the ongoing threat of load shedding, ever-increasing electricity tariffs, municipal shortage of capacity, demand charges on power, and the erratic quality of this power delivery with regard to spikes and dips,” he said. SolarAfrica MD David McDonald said SolarAfrica has developed a bespoke cantilever solar carport for this vast project. McDonald said the solar PV carport is locally sourced and has been specifically designed to offer hail protection for the finished goods vehicle inventory while producing cheaper, cleaner energy for Ford’s Silverton assembly plant.