US futures and Asian stocks rose Tuesday ahead of the American presidential election, while currency traders braced for increased volatility. Shares in Hong Kong, Australia and South Korea climbed more than 1%. Japan is closed for a holiday and Treasuries won’t trade until London opens. S&P 500 contracts advanced after the benchmark equity gauge gained Monday following last week’s 5.6% drop. Australian bond yields and the dollar fell after the central bank cut the cash rate and said it planned to buy A$100 billion ($70 billion) of five- and 10-year bonds over the next six months. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Implied volatility for the offshore yuan spiked. The one-week tenor — often used as a proxy of market risk — has more than doubled in the past week to the highest since Bloomberg began compiling the data in 2011. Overnight gauges for other currencies, such as the Australian dollar and sterling, also jumped as the presidential vote and its aftermath loom. “Uncertainty will likely remain until Wednesday morning when we should have clarity on who holds the Presidency and Senate, assuming and this is a big if, the polls are correct,” Sebastien Galy, a senior macro strategist at Nordea Investment Funds SA, wrote in a note.  Polls continue to show Democratic nominee Joe Biden ahead, though battleground states remain tight. Investors are fretting about the possibility the outcome will be contested, which means a clear winner might not emerge for some time, weighing on market sentiment. Also, while there has been a slight slowdown in virus cases in the US, several states continue to notch record numbers of infections. “It’s pretty much a binary outcome,” said Quincy Krosby, chief market strategist at Prudential Financial. “The question is, is the market right now looking at a Biden victory? And will it be disappointed if we don’t have that?” Once the US election passes, investors will contend with the Federal Reserve delivering a policy decision Thursday before the October jobs report Friday. Elsewhere, oil held gains after jumping the most in three weeks on Monday on increasing signs OPEC+ will delay a planned easing of output cuts. These are some key events coming up: These are some of the main moves in financial markets worldwide: