“As general nervousness levels rise — absent a blue wave or Democratic sweep — the prospect of a contested election is real,” said Ehsan Khoman, the head of Middle Eastern research at MUFG Bank in Dubai. “Such an outcome, which is far from a tail risk and, critically, how to hedge against this prospect, is top of the mind for emerging-market investors.” Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Last week’s sell-off in technology stocks and fresh coronavirus-related lockdowns across Europe are also adding to investors’ caution. Underscoring those anxieties, a measure of implied volatility for emerging-market stocks last week reached the highest level since June. For some bulls though, any pullback in the market would offer a buying opportunity as they wager on an economic recovery and the prospect of a Covid-19 vaccine next year. “The US election is obviously a big event risk, but irrespective of the outcome, global fiscal taps are wide open and a Covid vaccine is not far,” said Nader Naeimi, head of dynamic markets at AMP Capital Investors in Sydney. “Further weakness in emerging-market stocks is likely, but that will be a once-in-a-generation opportunity to get on board the markets and sectors that have been left behind.” Investors will also turn to central-bank decisions this week for clues on the next phase. The Federal Reserve is widely expected to hold fire on any additional stimulus measures in the midst of the election. Elsewhere, central banks in Malaysia, Poland and the Czech Republic will also decide on policy. Volatility in oil prices may also provide some bumps in the week ahead. Libya’s oil production is rising rapidly toward 1 million barrels, prompting crude to slump more than 4% in Asia morning, as demand continues to struggle amid the pandemic.