Given the perilous state of the government’s finances, slashing the public sector wage bill is a critical impediment to South Africa’s economic recovery plan, Business Unity SA (Busa) CEO Cas Coovadia warned in a briefing on Monday. “As South Africa considers the path towards recovery and the risks the government’s fiscal policy poses to that recovery – the capacity and cost of the state and in particular the public sector wage bill is a crucial factor,” he said. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Read:
Mboweni finally moves to slash government wage bill
Cosatu: ‘We’re not going to entertain an across-the-board wage freeze’ Busa is upping its ante around the hot button issue following Finance Minister Tito Mboweni tabling the 2020 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS). The organised business federation is effectively backing Mboweni, who himself has warned about the state’s ballooning wage bill putting the country at risk to a debt and potential fiscal crisis, if not brought under control. Busa commissioned Intellidex to do a research report on various aspects of SA’s public wage bill, to reinforce its position on the matter. The report titled “The Public Sector Wage Bill – an evidence-based assessment and how to address the challenge” was released on Monday, ahead of Busa’s briefing. Read: Mboweni: Close the hippo’s mouth or face Argentina-like debt crisis “Downward adjustments to the state’s payroll can be made either by reducing wages, reducing headcount, or doing both,” Coovadia said, as he reiterated suggestions contained in the report. “These are very difficult decisions, but the country has jumped off the cliff and we need to achieve a soft landing,” he said, adding that hard decision need to be made. “An essential element of a soft landing is a decrease in the public sector wage bill. If we assume a drop in nominal GDP of 4% this year and increases of 4% in each of the next two years, and we want to decrease payroll costs by 10.5% by 2025/26, aggregate payroll costs can increase by no more than 1.8% a year in nominal terms,” he pointed out. Coincidently, the proposed contained growth of 1.8% in the public sector wage bill is a figure also cited by Mboweni in his latest MTBPS. Speaking during Monday’s briefing, Business Leadership SA’s outspoken CEO Busi Mavuso said if the issue is not dealt with, the country risked further credit rating downgrades. “We all know what’s at stake – a fiscal debt crisis within three years… The public sector wage bill is one of the biggest challenges SA faces,” she said. Questioned if there is political will to address the issue, Mavuso added: “By-and-large there is political will, especially by the Finance Minister who is throwing the kitchen sink at the labour constituency [on the matter].” Meanwhile, Coovadia noted that SA’s high public-sector payroll costs were rising too quickly despite public-sector employment being increasingly unproductive. “Cutting the public sector wage bill is a tough task and will require government, labour and business working together to achieve this,” he said. Highlighting key aspects of the report around the state’s wage bill, he said the study showed that there is no “optimal” size for a public service, however, SA “probably needs one that is reasonably large” because of the socioeconomic issues that need to be addressed. “The report finds the South Africa public service is not large in per capita terms, but unusually well remunerated, when compared to a basket of 46 countries looked at by the International Monetary Fund [IMF],” said Coovadia. Public sector wages in SA are higher than the average of the countries in the IMF’s Worldwide Bureaucracy Indicators (WWBI) database, which includes the likes of Bangladesh, Greece, Brazil, Norway and Denmark. Countries from Europe, Africa and South America are part of the database, with a large number being emerging market nations. Other highlights include: While the report recognised differences in constitutional models between the countries featured in the IMF’s WWBI database, Coovadia noted that “it is clear that SA” has the highest ratio of compensation to public spending, with over 35% allocated to compensation.