The global stock rally eased on Thursday and Treasuries rose as investors assessed signals of overheated equity markets amid a deteriorating coronavirus situation in many large economies. European stocks opened lower as several earnings reports disappointed. Siemens AG slumped after forecasting a slight increase in 2021 profit while warning that some pandemic-related challenges will remain. UK financial services provider Legal & General Group Plc sank after saying it may keep its final 2020 dividend flat. One bright spot was Burberry Group Plc, which rose as much as 5.8% after sales dropped less than expected. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Most markets in Asia dipped, though Chinese technology shares rallied following their $290 billion wipeout over plans for tougher regulations. Futures for the S&P 500 Index and Nasdaq 100 slipped. Investors will look for fresh market catalysts later on Thursday in an online forum featuring speeches by European Central Bank President Christine Lagarde, the Bank of England Governor Andrew Bailey and Jerome Powell of the Federal Reserve.  Fears that an intensifying pandemic will curb the global economic rebound threaten this month’s almost 10% surge in global equities. While investors keep an eye on vaccine news and economic data, they’re also concerned about new restrictions emerging from Hong Kong to New York. “In the near term, the resurgence of the virus is beginning to make new worries,” Torsten Slok, chief economist at Apollo Global Management Inc., said on Bloomberg TV. “It looks like this will end up being a W-shaped recovery.” Global deaths jumped by more than 12,000, while US new daily cases set a record, with the early epicenter of New York ordering measures to tamp down a fresh wave. New York City ordered bars and restaurants with liquor licenses to close at 10 p.m. as officials struggle to prevent a second wave. On the vaccine front, Moderna Inc. said its trial has reached a key target for analysing the shot’s effectiveness. These are some key events coming up: These are some of the main moves in markets: 