A rally in global stocks stalled in Asian trading Tuesday amid concerns a large-scale coronavirus vaccine study still has hurdles to clear despite promising results. Bonds and other haven assets climbed after overnight declines. Shares pared gains in Japan, Hong Kong and Australia, and Chinese stocks fell. S&P 500 futures and European contracts declined. Concerns about a smaller US fiscal stimulus package, still surging coronavirus cases and legal challenges to the US election outcome weighed on the positive vaccine sentiment. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Earlier, the S&P 500 closed at a two-month high on news the coronavirus shot being developed by Pfizer Inc. and BioNTech SE prevented over 90% of infections. The Nasdaq 100 fell as investors rotated out of defensive technology names into shares depressed by the economic impact of lockdowns. Yields on 10-year Treasuries traded around their highest since March. A measure of credit-market risk eased to pre-pandemic levels, and US junk-bond yields fell to a record low. The dollar slipped. Oil pulled back after surging. Gold and the Japanese yen pared some of Monday’s losses.  Investors pulled out of defensive assets and poured cash into markets that are closely tied to economic growth. The top infectious disease expert in the US, Anthony Fauci, said the shot being developed by Pfizer will have a “major impact” on everything we do with regards to Covid-19 going forward. Still, experts cautioned questions remained before the shot is rolled out. And while an antibody therapy from Eli Lilly & Co. was granted emergency-use authorisation in the US, adding to optimism on the vaccine front, uncertainty remains in the race for immunisation. The final-stage trial of a frontrunner Chinese vaccine candidate was halted in Brazil due to a serious adverse event. “There are obvious questions about the sustainability of positive vaccine news flows – from efficacy, to scalability, to side effects, to distribution/refrigeration issue,” said Michael Purves, chief executive officer at Tallbacken Capital Advisors LLC. News of the vaccine’s potential success came as the US surpassed 10 million Covid-19 cases on Monday and appeared poised to hit record hospitalizations later this week. President-elect Joe Biden warned the nation faced a “dark winter” and announced a new coronavirus task force as his transition team seeks to fulfill a campaign promise to contain the outbreak. The Federal Reserve warned that asset prices in key markets could take a hit if the pandemic’s economic impact worsens in coming months. These are some key events coming up: These are some of the main moves in markets: