A lot happened at Moneyweb over the past few months during the protracted lockdown period. Moneyweb launched MoneywebNow, a brand-new digital morning business show hosted by the evergreen Simon Brown of JustOneLap, and the response has been phenomenal. The 20-minute show is live-streamed at 6:30 every weekday morning, and the podcast is available on all the major podcast platforms at 7 am allowing all executives, entrepreneurs, investors and everyone interested in the business world we live in to listen at their convenience. Downloads are growing exponentially, and it is clear there is a need for a business show in the morning to set the scene of the business day ahead. The idea of the podcast is to have it downloaded on the leading podcast players by 7 am and allow users to listen during their commute to the office. To make it even easier, Moneyweb also launched new mobile apps for both Apple and Android to allow users to listen to the MoneywebNow show with a few swipes, as well as to the podcasts of the previous evening’s RSG Geldsake and the SAfm MarketUpdate shows. The latest news penned by our award-winning editorial team and market indicators are of course also available. Watch the video on how to subscribe below:  Download the Android app here and the Apple app here. Covid 19 and the government’s aggressive reaction will have a significant impact on South Africa’s economic growth trajectory. The decisions we make today will have a market impact on this growth path and staying abreast with the latest news and analyses of these decisions is critical to all involved in our fragile economy. Moneyweb’s editorial team also recently received more recognition for the quality of its content. RSG Geldsake was a finalist in the business show category of the South African Radio Awards 2020, and we were a finalist in the highly respected Taco Kuiper investigative journalism competition. I also want to thank everyone in our community who signed up for Insider Gold subscriptions over the past few months. The support was astounding. Moneyweb will endeavour to continue to expand the offering to make it even more invaluable for our community. Learn about Insider Gold here. Please feel free to contact me directly if there is content you would like to see.