Drivers of minibus taxis in South Africa’s financial hub Gauteng went on strike on Monday to demand more financial support from government, leaving thousands of commuters stranded. Dozens of taxis blocked busy roads in Johannesburg and Pretoria, confronting police and soldiers. The SA National Defence Force posted the following tweets showing their interaction with drivers: Joint Tactical Headquarters Gauteng Province | Lenong Regiment at Tshwane assisting SA Police Service and Tshwane Metro Police Department to remove taxi drivers that are blocking the roads.https://t.co/dffsnbelLO#sandf #CoronavirusInSA#COVID19SA — SA National Defence Force (@SANDFCorpEvents) June 22, 2020  Joint Tactical Headquarters Gauteng Province | Lenong Regiment at Tshwane assisting SA Police Service and Tshwane Metro Police Department to remove taxi drivers that are blocking the roads.https://t.co/bLDuQsfZLD#sandf #CoronavirusInSA#COVID19SA — SA National Defence Force (@SANDFCorpEvents) June 22, 2020  Many people were stuck at taxi ranks, while others walked to work or piled onto buses. Since a coronavirus shutdown began in late March, taxis have been permitted to operate at only 70% capacity under strict social distancing measures, a difficult situation as the industry depends on maximum passenger loads at low prices. The loss of income from smaller loads and lower volumes due the shutdown, which saw most workplaces completely closed, has caused unhappiness in the industry, with operators threatening price increases of more 100% in some areas to cover losses. Santaco, ‘the principal mouthpiece of all taxis in South Africa’ was vocal on Twitter about taxi drivers’ demands, while condemning blockades and intimidation associated with the strike. The taxi industry gives the manufacturing industry at least 7 billion a year in taxi sales buying at least 1000 a month VAT inclusive. This VAT % goes to government every year. — SANTACO (@SA_Taxis) June 22, 2020  We condemn blocking of roads and intimidation of people. We urge SANTACO Gauteng and the general taxi industry to demonstrate a peaceful shutdown. — SANTACO (@SA_Taxis) June 22, 2020  The lockdown has been gradually eased and most of the workforce are now allowed to go to work. On Friday, Transport Minister Fikile Mbalula announced a R1.1 billion one-off payment to registered taxi operators, amounting to about R5 000 per driver. He said this was not compensation for loss of revenue due to coronavirus restrictions but rather assistance from the government. He updated the media on Monday, from Soshanguve: WATCH: I am in Soshanguve, speaking on the taxi shutdown. https://t.co/AlYmFJn95a — Minister of Transport |Mr Fix (@MbalulaFikile) June 22, 2020  Taxi operators rejected the relief and the conditions linked to government’s plan to formalise the industry.