On June 8 the North Gauteng High Court reviewed and set aside, by agreement, the impugned 2014 report compiled by the Inspector-General of Intelligence (IGI), including its findings and recommendations, on its ‘investigation’ into the media allegations against the special operations unit within the South African Revenue Service (Sars), maliciously referred to in the public domain as the so-called ‘Sars Rogue Unit’. The special operations unit comprised the national project unit, the central projects unit, the tactical interventions unit, evidence management and technical support, and the high-risk investigations unit. At the head was Johann van Loggerenberg, at the time the group executive: tax and customs enforcement investigations at Sars. The unit was tasked with conducting civil and criminal investigations aimed at combating and preventing criminal activity and recovering tax. The IGI report, dated October 31, 2014, resulted in a toxic slurry of disinformation and lies that swept away top Sars officials, ruined careers, stopped Sars forensic investigations, and destabilised Sars. The report was leaked to many parties, who then became complicit in spreading the lies. Van Loggerenberg, however, only became privy to a redacted and declassified version of this report five years later, on November 15, 2019, when it was made available to the Public Protector of South Africa. Concoction of lies and  more He immediately issued a public statement that the report was “nothing but a concoction of lies, disinformation, fraudulent claims and a complete cover-up of evidence and facts that implicate persons associated with the State Security Agency, its Special Operations Unit and other branches, as well as other state intelligence operatives and private entities and persons associated with the ‘Services'”. “It also purports to express ‘findings’ and ‘recommendations’ of and to the South African Revenue Service which are mala fide and ultra vires.” On December 4, 2019, Van Loggerenberg launched an application to the high court to review and set aside the report. The Minister of State Security (MSS) and the IGI initially served notices to appeal. Despite having been provided with ample opportunity to file the relevant records, they did not do so. Ultimately, they agreed to settle. The court ordered MSS and ICI to pay Van Loggerenberg’s costs. Fighting the tide of disinformation In the years from 2014 to present, Van Loggerenberg has had to fight for survival, systematically taking on all parties spreading false allegations. He has itemised this costly, time-consuming battle, which I have briefly summarised below: Read: Gordhan reacts angrily to Sars rogue unit ‘rumour’ (Dec 2015) Putting facts out in the public domain Van Loggerenberg authored/co-authored three books to counter the false allegations: Cleaning up the toxic slurry Van Loggerenberg calls upon: Sars media briefing On June 9, Sars stated that Sars Commissioner Edward Kieswetter has: “consistently held the view that there is no evidence of an institutionalised ‘rogue unit’ in Sars” and that the court order “brings this debate to an end”. Further civil suits? Van Loggerenberg has confirmed that he will be consulting his lawyers on the following: In a media statement, Van Loggerenberg’s attorney Bernard Hotz, a director at Werksmans, states: “Our client has always, since May 2014 and later October 2014, acted in good faith as a whistleblower, in the interests of justice, the public, the South African Revenue Service (Sars) and former and current officials (and their families) who have been traumatised and harmed beyond comprehension. “Van Loggerenberg has also had to engage and litigate at his own cost against other parties who have had access to funds, including taxpayer funds.” The misinformation concerning the debunked ‘rogue unit’ continues to spread. Strong action, not words, needs to be taken against the perpetrators.