Trencor minority shareholders were left fuming on Thursday after an annual general meeting at which the board held resolutely to its controversial decision to delay the final winding up of the company until December 2024. During a heated two-hour long virtual AGM, board chair David Nurek argued they had no choice because of the indemnities they had provided, which expire at the end of 2024. “If we hadn’t provided the indemnities none of the ‘simplification’ would have been possible,” said Nurek, referring to the planned winding up of the company. Decades-old structure He explained that the trustees of a trust structure – put in place in Lichtenstein decades ago while Trencor was being built into a formidable player in the global leasing industry – insisted on this level of protection. The $62 million (R1 billion) indemnity represents a substantial portion of the group’s value and is currently sitting in a no-interest-bearing dollar account. Shane Watkins, chief investment officer at All Weather Capital, criticised the board for not providing details of possible claims that lay behind the need for such substantial indemnities. Nurek would only say that the amount was agreed after tough negotiations with the trustees, who are Trencor directors. He also said the provision of an indemnity was customary and that Trencor had used law firm ENS to provide advice on the matter. Shareholder Nic Krige told the meeting he was shocked at the size of the indemnity and, based on his research, that it was far from customary. “What is extremely unusual is that the cash-back element is so high,” said Krige. He asked the board what Lichtenstein-based advisor they had used and said the indemnity arrangement, including costs involved in delaying the winding up of the business, would cost Trencor shareholders R500 million by December 2024. More big numbers … In addition to the $62 million earning no interest, there is a further indemnity of $16 million as well as $10 million being held back for “unforeseen future events and expenses”. Furthermore, management has retained R176 million to cover operating expenses between now and December 2024. Watkins has said the net asset value of the company is R12.25 a share, most of which is in US dollars, with the exception of three million Textainer shares (worth 258c per Trencor share), which will be unbundled to Trencor shareholders within weeks. At Thursday’s meeting Watkins said the out-of-touch board had driven the company into a cul-de-sac with the four-year delay destroying shareholder value. He described the value destruction as being of epic proportion. Trencor CEO Hennie van der Merwe said that although the cash was not earning any interest it represented an attractive rand hedge for shareholders. Watkins told Moneyweb after the AGM the Trencor board has indicated that the possibility of a claim is highly remote. “So what is it they’re not telling us?” The all-white male board also came under attack for its lack of diversity. Before he was muted from the meeting Krige described the board as “like walking into an apartheid museum”. Gomolemo Seete, an ESG analyst at All Weather Capital, asked what efforts had been made to attract new talent to the board since it had identified the need for diversity back in 2016. Nurek said no search for new talent had been instituted “because we didn’t see the need to” as no new directors had been needed since 2016. Over 30% of shareholders voted against Nurek’s re-election at the meeting. 