Tax Ombud Judge Bernard Ngoepe released his second report on the investigation into systemic issues at the South African Revenue Service (Sars) on Tuesday. Complaints received by the Office of the Tax Ombud by taxpayers, tax practitioners and recognised controlling bodies highlighted a combination of factors that are discussed below. Accuracy of PAYE statements of account The investigation revealed five aspects that might have given rise to complaints about statements of account related to pay-as-you-earn (PAYE) tax. Industry bodies have also raised concerns that the balance of a statement of account may change constantly during the day, with neither the taxpayer nor Sars having any idea what the real status is. This can result in the taxpayer being denied a tax clearance certificate, through no fault of their own, and this would negatively impact business opportunities. Penalties and interest are automatically levied if no payment is made. Sars asserts that when a payment is subsequently correctly allocated, it is done using the date on which the payment was actually received, and the penalty and interest will automatically be reversed. Sars insists that if it raises an assessment (revised declaration) due to an audit or verification, a notice of revised assessment is issued to the taxpayer. The ombud recommends that: General observations The ombud observed that Sars relies on certain functionalities within its system to track allocations made in statements of account: “Even Sars itself finds it difficult to explain certain transactions by merely looking at a statement of account without accessing its systems.” Taxpayers and tax practitioners do not have access to Sars systems. Sars responded that major changes have been made, including validation rules on the submission of the EMP501 to ensure complete and accurate submission, validation of IRP5s, validating the calculations of the employment tax incentive and non-compliance, warning messages on the EMP501 where values differ, and automatic correction of EMP501s. Sars’s failure to adhere to the prescribed timeframes The ombud found that: Dispute resolution rules The TAA prescribes procedures to be followed in lodging an objection and appealing against an assessment or decision that is subject to objection and appeal. The dispute resolution rules also set out the procedures for alternative dispute resolution. Sars adopts a very strict approach towards taxpayers in enforcing compliance with the timeframes; however, it does not itself always adhere to the timeframes. The ombud says Sars has not taken the necessary steps to resolve the underlying causes of the delays, which persist into the present. “Sars often enforces its tax collection measures with rigidity against the taxpayers’ non-compliance, while the taxpayer is often helpless to hold Sars to the prescribed timeframes.” Data interrogated The ombud obtained substantive data from Sars to interrogate: Of the 449 096 cases, only 53 804 (12%) of objections were disallowed, and 243 664 (54.3%) were invalidated. The ombud found a 31% error rate where the objections were incorrectly invalidated. The ombud says Sars should: Automated calculation of days The ombud established that the Sars system does not correctly calculate dates for dispute resolution; for example, it does not exclude public holidays or weekends. This results in objections that are filed on time being routed for condonation by the system automatically. This creates delays in the dispute resolution procedure and adds to the workflow of both taxpayers and Sars staff by introducing a separate and unnecessary procedural step. The incorrect calculation of days also impacts appeals. Standardised letters are often incorrect and may, for example, contain a fixed paragraph referring taxpayers to an incorrect process step for the resolution of the dispute. The ombud says Sars should: Ngoepe said he is “grateful for the contribution made by our stakeholders, the cooperation and support we received from Sars, and most importantly my [Office of the Tax Ombud] colleagues who conducted the investigation. I am confident that working together with our stakeholders, including Sars, we would continue to reduce systemic issues and improve our country’s tax administration system”. Read: Balancing Sars’s powers and duties with taxpayers’ rights and obligations Even though taxpayers are also often at fault in failing to submit documents on time or follow the correct procedures, Sars has the greater power that it can wield against taxpayers. Taxpayers can therefore suffer more prejudice. The tax ombud’s role in enabling an ongoing process of open discussion and cooperation will hopefully lead to a stronger, more efficient Sars – and taxpayers who have more faith in the tax system.