Asset management is generally a conservative industry. Most investors have liked it that way. “We as investors tell asset managers that we don’t want them to change,” said Gyongyi King, CIO at Alexander Forbes Investments. “It’s a positive and a benefit if they keep the same processes and same people.” Reality, however, may be catching up with this approach. For a number of years, investment returns have been poor, and the economic implications of the Covid-19 crisis are only going to exacerbate this. Asset managers who simply keep on doing what they have always done could find that the world has moved past them. Read:
The role of asset managers in the Covid-19 crisis
What are asset managers delivering? “The economic landscape for an asset manager has changed quite dramatically,” said King. “The old business models were very much performance and investment-return driven. But, going forward, you are going to have to be clearer what your value-add is.” Put another way, asset managers can’t rely on investment returns to be a differentiator when performance is extremely hard to come by. This is particularly the case in a world where passive investing continues to increase its market share. The asset manager of the future King believes that to be successful, asset managers need to position themselves to meet a particular market need. There are four areas she identifies where this is likely to happen: “Historically, all of these things could be grouped together,” said King. “But now you have to be very clear that you have chosen one of these routes.” She believes that managers who fall between these models are going to struggle as the market shifts. This could be a particular concern for mid-sized managers. A potential solution for them lies in consolidation. “That is a trend globally, and we are seeing a bit of it in South Africa,” said King. “We think you will see a pick up in consolidation because that does allow you to get to scale. In the US, for instance, the big are just getting bigger and it is much harder for others to compete unless they consolidate.” Imperatives for fund selectors This also has implications for those responsible for picking fund managers. “Investment performance is a crucial aspect of choosing any asset manager,” said King. “But what you need to be looking at is not just the probability of being successful from an investment perspective. You need to be asking very long term questions around business models.” Read:
SA’s largest asset managers’ market share is decreasing
Has your money been better off with a big manager, or a small one? (Dec 2019) In other words, conducting an analysis of an asset manager has to look beyond just their investment process and their current approach. It needs to ask whether the firm has considered its future positioning within a changing industry. “Even if they don’t have all the answers, managers should at least be thinking about it,” said King. “They can’t just be replicating the same old model going forward.” Because even a conservative industry like asset management is unlikely to escape the disruption caused by the Covid-19 pandemic. “Some things we thought would take years and years to play out in the asset management context have already happened much quicker, such as engaging with people on online platforms,” said King. “Disruptive trends are playing out much faster. And if we as investors are asking for these requirements from asset managers, that will only speed up the change even more.” Read: Platform profiles best-of-breed boutique asset managers Patrick Cairns is South Africa editor at Citywire, which provides insight and information for professional investors globally. This article was first published on Citywire South Africa here, and republished with permission.