Oil hovered around the $42.50 a barrel mark as one of two storm fronts menacing crude production and refineries in the US Gulf of Mexico was downgraded, while the other gathered strength. Futures in New York were little changed after rising 0.7% on Monday. Tropical storm Marco faded with safety warnings dropped, although Laura is set to become a hurricane before making landfall Thursday. Some 82% of oil output in the Gulf has been halted as operators brace for the weather system to hit. Refinery closures from companies including Motiva Enterprises LLC and Valero Energy Corp. could potentially shut in more than 1 million barrels a day of capacity before the storm threat passes. US gasoline futures rose to the highest since before the pandemic on concern over possible fuel shortages.  The hurricane could have ramifications for global energy flows — diverting gasoline from Europe to the US for example — and has translated into higher premiums for crudes from the affected region. The impacts are likely to be fleeting, however, with the coronavirus and how fast global oil production returns to remain the key price drivers for the foreseeable future. “The potential loss of supply in the Gulf of Mexico is about 2% of US production and that’s not a game changer,” said Howie Lee, an economist at Oversea-Chinese Banking Corp. in Singapore. “We should see some price action in future with better news on vaccines, or gasoline demand recovering.” Brent’s three-month timespread was $1.24 a barrel in contango — where prompt contracts are cheaper than later-dated ones — narrowing from $1.47 in contango on August 20, the widest since May. The change in the market structure of the global benchmark crude suggests that while there’s still some concern about over-supply, it’s eased slightly in recent days. Prospects for a quick end to Libya’s civil war and a resumption of oil exports dimmed, meanwhile, after forces loyal to eastern commander Khalifa Haftar scoffed at the United Nations-backed government’s cease-fire announcement.