The ANC plans to formulate an official policy regarding amendments to Regulation 28 by mid-September. If there are amendments, it will not include any prescription. This was the message from Enoch Godongwana, the head of the ANC’s economic transformation subcommittee on RSG Geldsake on Tuesday night. “We hope that by mid-September we should have direction as to whether we’re going to have any amendment in Regulation 28. Mind you, such an amendment will not be a prescription. We will watch what form that amendment will take, what objectives it is intended to achieve. That is the precise outcome we intend to have by mid-September,” he said. He emphasised that the original resolution adopted at the ANC’s Nasrec conference in 2017 called for the investigation of prescription. “There is significant misinformation in the market and we are saying, the resolution of the conference says we must explore prescription, but prescription will only apply where there’s attractive investment and people do not want to invest for whatever reason. “At the moment, the conditions are such that where the infrastructure is attractive for investment, people invest and there will be no need for prescription.” The retirement industry, and many individuals in the financial services industry, has reacted extremely negatively to the prospect of prescribed assets. In response to a question as to why there is such negativity in the market, Godongwana blamed the media for spreading misinformation. “The negative prospects of prescribed assets are not a product of our own making. There are a lot of statements which are attributed to us by you as journalists which are not our statements. Therefore they serve to generate negative perceptions.” As examples he cited newspaper reports which claimed the ANC wanted to use pension funds to capitalise the state bank. “There’s no such statement from the ANC. There was also not a statement that we want to bail out failing state entities. We’ve never said that [on] a single day. “So journalists create stories and therefore build this negativity around the issue.” However, it is not only media reports that have suggested the ANC intends to implement prescriptive policies. The Democratic Alliance (DA) recently published a press release related to a leaked draft ANC document headlined: ‘Asset Prescription: The ANC is firmly committed to economic insanity’. The document proposes to “Amend Regulation 28 of the Pension Fund Act in order to increase the access of the Savings of South Africans to fund long-term infrastructure and capital projects, as a result increase the availability of funds to DFIs and financial intermediaries at a reasonable rate of interest.” The DA labelled this as “ANC-speak for forcing pension funds to lend money to SOEs [state-owned entities] and other development finance institutions (like the Land Bank – which recently defaulted on its own debts, and a future State Bank, which the document also proposes).” Consultation Godongwana emphasised that the final policy decision will be “a product of engagement”, adding that the ANC is in discussion with the Association for Savings and Investment (Asisa) regarding the possible amendment of Regulation 28. “They’ve (Asisa) responded to our proposal, our discussion on Regulation 28. By July 24 we had already had a response from them. So there’s a discussion with industries and with affected parties; there’s no panic and negative perception among them.” Moneyweb approached Asisa for comment, but a spokesperson said Asisa will only respond after a meeting with the ANC regarding the document submitted to the ANC on 24 July. However, Asisa has previously stated publicly that it is opposed to the principle of prescribed assets. Significant demand for investment in projects Godongwana also stated that there is already a significant demand from the private sector to invest in public infrastructure projects. “Over the last few years, more than R250 billion has been placed in IPPs (independent power producers). That’s infrastructure for energy, and everybody is participating in the infrastructure for IPPs. Do you know why? Because government has made it attractive for people to invest in IPPs, providing guarantees and also providing a power-purchase agreement, which provides for take or pay, all of those things that incentivise people to invest in IPPs. As we speak, everybody says ‘When is window five coming, when is window five coming?’ They want to invest because the infrastructure projects have been made attractive.” Asked whether it is necessary to change Regulation 28 if there is significant interest in investing in such projects, Godongwana said the current provisions limit some funds to invest in such projects. “At the moment Regulation 28 provides for a maximum of 10% investment (in unlisted entities). That’s a cap. But, despite that small cap… only 2% was invested into direct infrastructure.” He said if the reason for this low update is regulation, it needs to change. “We’ve been speaking to a number of pension funds who want an amendment of Regulation 28 for a different reason: because some of them want to put their money into private space rather than in equities. So there is a debate – not only by us, who are talking about trying to look at Regulation 28.” Listen to Ryk van Niekerk’s interview with Enoch Godongwana below, or read the transcript here. 