Applications for US unemployment benefits unexpectedly increased last week, a stumble for the labour market in its long road to recovery. Initial jobless claims in regular state programs rose by 135,000 to more than 1.1 million in the week ended August 15, Labour Department data showed Thursday. Continuing claims — the total number of Americans claiming ongoing unemployment assistance in those programs — decreased to 14.8 million in the week ended August 8, the lowest since early April. The median estimate in a Bloomberg survey of economists called for 920,000 initial claims in the latest week, which coincides with the survey period for the government’s monthly employment report. S&P 500 Index futures fell while the yield on the 10-year Treasury note remained lower after the data. The dollar weakened.  The pickup in jobless claims reinforces forecasts that improvement in the labour market will occur in fits and starts. Claims well exceed the worst week in the 2007-2009 recession, and while new Covid-19 cases have been slowing, thousands are still reported daily. The impact is particularly prominent in the consumer-facing industries such as restaurants, travel and leisure. Sustained weekly increases in claims would raise concern that the job market is in danger of unraveling after recent progress. At the same time, the downward trend in continuing claims is favorable news for the recovery, though headwinds persist. Companies are going bankrupt and small businesses are disappearing at a time when the economy has only recovered about half of the jobs it lost in March and April. The unemployment rate is still nearly three times its February level. The absence of an additional stimulus package threatens the fragile economic recovery as businesses run out of aid, while the uneven reopening of schools is making it difficult for many parents to work. On an unadjusted basis, initial claims rose to 891,510 from 838,734 as New Jersey, New York and Texas reported sizable increases from the previous week. With the expiration of the extra $600 in weekly jobless benefits at the end of last month and the inability of Republican and Democratic lawmakers to come to an agreement on how to extend them, President Donald Trump signed an executive action to provide $300 a week in federal support to most unemployment benefit recipients. A handful of states have been issued the first round of funding for the Lost Wages Assistance program, including Iowa, Arizona, New Mexico, Louisiana, Utah, Colorado and Missouri, though the majority have yet to distribute the funds. Arizona began issuing funds to claimants earlier this week, but it’s unclear when most Americans will begin to see the supplemental aid. In addition to applications for unemployment benefits in regular state programs, states reported 542,797 initial claims for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance in the week ended August 15. That’s the federal program extending unemployment benefits to those not typically eligible like the self-employed. As the pandemic drags on, more and more people are beginning to claim Pandemic Emergency Unemployment Compensation, the federal program that provides up to 13 additional weeks of jobless benefits to those who have exhausted their regular benefits. While most states offer 26 weeks of benefits, others, such as Florida and North Carolina offer about half of that. Almost 1.3 million people were claiming the aid in the week ended August 1. © 2020 Bloomberg