 CIARAN RYAN: For every organisation right now, this is an unprecedented time. Businesses of all sizes and entire industries will need to adjust to disruption and change. And the coming months will be pivotal for many. The Covid-19 pandemic has had a dramatic impact on how we live and work. Much has changed, and many things may never be the same. Never before have we relied so much on technology to help us adapt, reinvent and transform the way we interact and do business. In April this year, Microsoft Teams saw 200 million meeting participants in a single day, generating more than 4.1 billion meeting minutes. With so many remote-working success stories, it seems impossible that organisations will not make permanent changes to their processes, where possible. In fact, African businesses will have to adapt and digitally transform their operations faster than ever if they are to compete in the global economy, with banks already under pressure to do exactly that. I’m Ciaran Ryan for Moneyweb. And here to discuss how technology will be a key ally in rebooting enterprises is Amr Kamel, enterprise commercial director at Microsoft for South Africa. First of all, Amr, how are you? AMR KAMEL: I’m fine Ciaran, thank you very much. It’s a pleasure to be with you. CIARAN RYAN: Good. Those are some staggering numbers that we’ve just mentioned there – 200 million people meeting through Microsoft Teams in a single day, 4.1 billion meeting minutes. Give us an idea of the impact of Covid-19 on business operations worldwide over the last six months. AMR KAMEL: The reality is [that] in a matter of months Covid-19 has ushered in unprecedented changes for people and businesses across the world, requiring organisations of all shapes and sizes to adjust. The pandemic has affected how we live, work and the world as we know it will not be the same. In recent months, to your point around Teams, we’ve seen growth in remote working, and several companies can now attest to the benefits of enabling it to mean working from home [is an option]. In fact, research shows that companies in Africa are considering remote working – in some cases, on a permanent basis, or certainly as part of a hybrid work strategy. For sure, Covid has an impact across all our lives. But, from a business standpoint, I think it has been a catalyst for enabling digital strategies across organisations. Companies need to ensure that employees have the right tools to do their jobs effectively and productively wherever they are. CIARAN RYAN: Alright. We’ve seen businesses that have adopted Teams as an integral tool in their armoury. What do you think businesses can and need to do to adjust to this new world of work – and are they doing it fast enough? AMR KAMEL: We see three phases that businesses and industries have to navigate through as they emerge from the Covid-19 pandemic, and these [are] respond, recover and reimagine. The respond theme is primarily about crisis management, addressing the immediate need to continue business operations in a quick and safe manner. To a large extent, we have moved through this phase with businesses forced to respond rapidly to pressing changes. But as businesses move from the response phase, how would businesses recover from the shutdown and the economic fallout so that they can scale quickly, integrating several critical impacts and team-mining costs and operational efficiency? Organisations are now scaling up as we rebuild battered economies, [and] as we rebuild the battered economies – the reimagined phase, it’s about shaping our new normal and considering how to reconfigure systems, structures and people priorities to a new north star. CIARAN RYAN: Okay, what’s your take on the South African business landscape during these months of lockdown? Have we been able to weather the storm as well as other countries, or are we lagging behind? AMR KAMEL: Many South African businesses were caught unprepared for such a sudden shift in digital operations. For the first time ever, some found themselves completely unable to operate and others had to close completely. For South African/African business to succeed, they must take the adoption and deployment of digital technologies seriously. We must provide employees with the skills needed to find employment and thrive in a digital economy. And we must do this across the economy, from small businesses to the larger enterprises. If we don’t, we will fall behind our regional and global competitors. And when the next crisis swings around, we will find ourselves once again ill-prepared to handle it. I think the digital adoption is ramping up nicely, [especially] in the past couple of months, and I see that, as an organisation embarking on the ‘recover, reimagine’ phases, I think we’re building the capabilities that are required for this next phase of rebuilding. CIARAN RYAN: Alright, you’ve talked about reimagining businesses. Give us an idea of what exactly you mean by that. How do companies reimagine themselves, and how does technology fit into that? AMR KAMEL: Sure. Let me try to give you a few examples from the industry. Let me start with financial services operating in such a rapidly evolving world. The financial services landscape means that banks have to adapt at the pace of change, and that increasingly means implementing intelligent, compliant, cross-fit and secure industry-proven technology and solutions that enable real-time analysis and insights to help manage and mitigate risk, as well as ensure regulatory compliance today and in the future. In retail, for years virtual offerings and online solutions have been an optional perk, if we really talk about it; something added on the side of the core business, no more. Now in the past few months, we’ve seen that online retail digital solutions and virtual offerings can work. And, more importantly, they can work at scale. CIARAN RYAN: Do you think the global skills landscape is able to meet the challenges that are facing businesses right now? Do we have the right skills? AMR KAMEL: Not yet. The skills gap is a big challenge that the whole industry needs to come together to solve. Our data show that two years’ worth of digital transformation has been concentrated in the past two months. But the pandemic has shone a harsh light on what was already a widening skills gap around the world, a gap that needs to be closed with even greater urgency to accelerate economic recovery. This long-term disconnect between supply and demand for skills in the labour market appears to be driven by three primary long-term factors. The rapid emergence of AI [artificial intelligence] power technologies that are propelling a new era of automation, the growing need for technological acumen to compete in the changing commercial landscape and, lastly, the drop off in employer-based training in investments over the past two decades. In the shorter term Covid-19 will continue to lead to unprecedented reliance on digital skills. In many situations, some workers may spend several months or longer in a hybrid economy, where some will be in the workplace, while others continue to work from home. Over the next five years, we estimate that the global workforce can uphold around 149 million new technology-oriented jobs. Software development accounts for the largest single share of this forecast, but all the related fields like data analysis, cybersecurity and privacy protection are also posed to grow substantially. CIARAN RYAN: Okay, Amr Kamel, I think we’re going to leave it at that. Thanks very much for joining us and for sharing your insights into how technology is going to be reshaping businesses going forward. That was Amr Kamel, who is enterprise commercial director at Microsoft for South Africa. Brought to you by Microsoft.