South Africa’s headline consumer inflation quickened to 3.2% year-on-year in July from 2.2% in June, data from Statistics South Africa showed on Wednesday. On a month-on-month basis, the consumer price index was at 1.3% in July from 0.5% in the previous month. Core inflation, which excludes prices of food, non-alcoholic beverages, fuel and energy, was also 3.2% year-on-year in July compared with a rate of 3.0% in June. On a month-on-month basis core inflation rose, to 0.7% from 0.3% previously. Nedbank’s inflation forecast Inflation has probably reached a short-term peak and should soften from this point, but not significantly, according to Nedbank Group Economic Unit statement on Wednesday. The unit expects inflation to average 3.3% this year. “This benign inflation outlook as well as poor growth prospects point to there being room for further monetary easing by the Reserve Bank. The Bank’s Quarterly Projection Model is also forecasting one more rate cut of 25 basis points this year. “While the possibility of one more cut is on the cards, recent split decisions by the Reserve Bank underscore how difficult it is to forecast in the current economic environment. Our view is for rates to remain on hold,” said the bank unit. PwC’s inflation forecast Auditor PwC expects inflation to average 3.6% this year, according to its economists’ commentary on Wednesday. PwC Strategy Africa Chief Economist Lullu Krugel and PwC Strategy& Economist Dr Christie Viljoen said: “The large recession – our baseline scenario sees the economy shrinking by 10.4% in 2020 – will keep price increases limited. South African retailers will need to contend with, by our estimates, a net loss of 1.6 million jobs in the country by the end of this year. The adverse impact that this will have on disposable income and household expenditure will further increase retailers’ inability (as seen in recent years) to significantly pass on price increases to strained consumers. PwC sees room for a little more monetary policy easing from the SARB – there is currently not much room left to further open the taps.” “A key near-term development in the interest rate outlook will be the release of official GDP data for the second quarter on September 8. When the MPC meets again next month, it will have access to this data, and be able to finetune its own projections for the South African economy. PwC anticipates a roughly 30% y-o-y plunge in economic activity during the April-June period. The SARB said in July that it forecasts a full-year economic contraction of 7.0% this year which we think is too conservative. “Our current projection of a 10.4% full-year decline includes consideration for significant levels of loadshedding during the remainder of 2020 which the central bank might not have planned for. If the Q2 GDP data is much worse than the SARB anticipated, and its full year recession forecast for 2020 deepens, the MPC could see room for more interest rate cuts over the next 12 months.”