Sasol took a beating on the JSE in early morning trade after the group announced a huge loss for the financial year to June 2020, despite a profit warning last week that indicated that shareholders must expect a loss of several a billion rand. However, the reality of a headline loss of nearly R7.3 billion saw the share price falling by some 10% to a low of R132 before bouncing back a bit to close the day 5% lower at just below R140 per share. The large loss represents a big turnaround from a profit of R18.9 billion in the previous financial year, which wasn’t a great year either. Headline earnings per share fell from the already disappointing R30.72 in the 2019 year to a loss of R11.79 per share in the recent year – the result of the numerous problems Sasol has been struggling with for the last few years. The last dividend is a distant memory that dates from the half year to end-December 2018. In a discussion of the results in a prerecorded webcast, CEO Fleetwood Grobler said that the results is a story of two halves where the first six months of the year was characterised by a sound operating performance amid financial challenges, while the second half was one of significant volatility and uncertainty brought on by the Covid-19 pandemic. Gearing period has has peaked “This financial year was also our peak gearing period as we approached the near completion of the Lake Charles Chemical Project [LCCP]. Geopolitical dynamics in the latter half of the year saw the Brent crude oil price collapse to 21-year lows, while the onset of the pandemic placed even greater pressure on our balance sheet,” says Grobler. The balance sheet shows that the increase in LCCP financing and low profits during an extremely difficult six months pushed total liabilities up by 31% to a massive R319 billion at year-end compared to R244 billion at the end of June 2019. Grobler says oil prices have been extremely volatile. “Volatility I have not seen during my 36 years at Sasol,” he says. Even people with little interest in the oil price are aware of the huge swings during the last few months. We have seen oil falling from a high of $68 per barrel in December 2019 to a low of $21 in April 2020 and then more than doubling to the present levels of around $44 per barrel. Lake Charles impact in perspective Grobler also reiterated the fact that the completion of LCCP had an impact on the income statement as all costs, depreciation and interest were accounted for through profit and loss as most units at the big plant reached beneficial production during the last six months. These cost items were capitalised until recently, as is normal during a project’s construction phase. The results disclosed the cost of financing LCCP for the first time – a cool R7 billion was paid in interest. “Profitability was impacted by R2.3 billion of start-up losses at LCCP. This performance is expected to improve in financial 2021 as most of these losses were recorded during the first half of the 2020 financial year,” says Grobler. Points of impact The presentation to shareholders summarised the impact of the unique economic environment and the actions to deal with challenges during the difficult second half of the financial year. In SA, fuel production declined significantly due to the total shutdown of Sasol’s Natref refinery and partial shutdown of the synfuels operation at Secunda for two months due to the sharp decline in demand for petrol during the Covid-19-induced lockdown. Management saw an opportunity to accelerate maintenance, which removed the need for maintenance shutdowns that were scheduled for later this year. It also prioritised production of chemicals rather than fuel. Sasol completed the LCCP, commissioned all the units for production, and started to increase production steadily – reporting a nearly 30% increase in chemical output compared to the previous financial year. Future-focused Both Grobler and CFO Paul Victor discussed the steps Sasol took in reaction to the external shocks, as well as the reactive steps it took and is taking to position the company for a better and more profitable future. In fact, this forward-looking focus – rather than lamenting on the past or the difficulties of the present – is what shareholders are probably looking at when considering the merits of investing in Sasol. Management repeated its view that it is very likely that the oil price will stay lower for longer due to subdued economic growth worldwide. Low economic growth will obviously impact on the market for chemicals as well. Grobler reminded shareholders that Sasol exceeded its cost-saving target of $1 billion and has plans to deliver another $1 billion in cost savings in the new financial year. Management reiterated that the focus is on cost containment, cash flow, capital expenditure and cash management. “We maintained a strong focus on cash flow this year and reported free cash flow, excluding growth capital, of R8.5 billion in the second half of the year compared to R2,6 billion in the first half,” said Victor from his chair in the finance department. “We have managed to maintain our cash inflection point reached in January 2020 despite significant cash flow challenges faced during the second half of the financial year.” Victor also reported that Sasol is making good progress on disposing of assets, as announced previously. A few deals have been finalised and some are in progress. In short, Victor predicts that Sasol will be able to reduce debt by between $4 billion and $6 billion during the 2021 financial year, which might include a rights issue of up to $2 billion. However, Grobler and Victor pertinently said that Sasol will only decode how much capital to raise during the second half of the financial year (thus in calendar 2021) after it has completed all the changes currently under way. Grobler dedicated a big part of his presentation to the future of Sasol. What does the future Sasol look like? According to Grobler, the future Sasol “is streamlined, focused and positioned to succeed”. “Sasol will be an attractive investment, by delivering good returns which are underpinned by low costs, high margins, strong capital discipline and business sustainability,” he said. “Our business portfolios are distinct and customer-centric. They participate in select global markets to drive value-based growth. They are responsible for their own profit and loss, supported by a leaner and more fit-for-purpose centre that provides strategic boundaries, allocates capital and enables the business units.” Luister na Ryk van Niekerk se onderhoud met Sasol FD Paul Victor (or read the English transcript here): <a href="http://iono.fm/e/882694">Content hosted by iono.fm</a> Grobler promised improved outcomes for employees, stronger relationships with stakeholders, and enhanced returns for shareholders. Victor added figures: Management concluded that the 2021 financial year remains a critical period for Sasol, but warned that the Covid-19 pandemic and macroeconomic swings are expected to continue, which may have a further impact on Sasol. “We are very conscious that the company has been through a period of high capital spend and our strategy will therefore have a greater focus on enhanced cash generation and value realisation for shareholders,” says Grobler. This sentiment is bound to endear him to suffering shareholders, especially if they are expected to supply more capital next year. Sasol promised an investment update by November, hopefully announcing good news of a dramatic turnaround in its finances after the difficult 2020 financial year and the devastation of adjusting the values of its assets by billions.