The final week of August may prove key for emerging markets attempting to erase this year’s losses as investors fret that rising US-China tension will overshadow optimism on vaccine developments. Stocks, currencies and dollar bonds from the developing world fell last week after President Donald Trump called off a meeting on the trade pact. MSCI’s emerging-market equity gauge halted a four-week winning streak, while Brazil’s real and Russia’s ruble led losses in 13 of 24 currencies tracked by Bloomberg. Dollar bonds slid for a second week, the first back-to-back decline since the pandemic was declared in March, a Bloomberg Barclays index shows. Investors are seeking confirmation of revised timing for the US-China talks as the yuan dances around the key 6.90 per dollar level. The Trump administration ratcheted up pressure on China last week, suspending its extradition treaty with Hong Kong and ending reciprocal tax treatment on shipping with the former British colony. The move came after China imposed a national security law that led to charges against more than 20 pro-democracy activists. “The main thing markets will continue to focus on is US-China,” said John Malloy, co-head of emerging and frontier markets at RWC Partners in Miami, which oversees $8 billion in emerging and frontier assets. “As we get closer to the election, we’re going to see more rhetoric coming out of the US government and probably responses from Chinese authorities as well.”  Currencies from the developing world may not attract inflows without promising vaccine news, according to Citigroup Global Markets Inc. strategists including Dirk Willer in New York. Credit markets will also pay close attention to scientific developments to track when economies can reopen without the risk of a resurgence. “Markets should continue to trade vaccine headlines, and although a ‘silver bullet’ vaccine is unlikely in the near term, expedited review processes in some countries (e.g. China and Russia) could present upside surprises as the year concludes,” Citigroup strategists wrote in a separate note. Political risk still clouds sentiment in the Eastern Europe, Middle East and Africa region. In Eastern Europe, investors will watch Belarus, where President Alexander Lukashenko faces protests after a disputed election. While Vladimir Putin publicly supports Lukashenko, Russia’s president has problems of his own after being accused of orchestrating the near-fatal poisoning of an opposition leader. In Africa, regional leaders are pressing their demand for the reinstatement of Mali President Boubacar Keita, who was deposed in a military coup last week. France and the United Nations, wary of the impact the coup may have on a Western-backed counter-insurgency effort in the country, appealed for calm and urged soldiers who detained Keita to free him.