Standard Bank’s interim results are of significant importance – this the first set of results from one of SA’s big banks to show the effects of the health and economic crisis on the financial sector and, more importantly, on clients’ finances. Standard Bank CEO Sim Tshabalala described the period under review as the “most difficult six months in living memory” during an online presentation of the group’s interim results for the half-year to June. “The contraction in the economy was unprecedented in both the pace and scale and, in SA, mirrored the mounting risk of a sovereign debt crisis,” said Tshabalala in a webcast watched by more than 400 people. Tshabalala described Standard Bank’s results as satisfactory, given the “most challenging economic conditions in a century” with strict lockdowns bringing the economy to a near-standstill. Bitter pill to swallow The figures suggest that the CEO is trying to add a thick layer of sugar to a bitter pill. Headline earnings fell by 44% to R7.5 billion compared with nearly R13.4 billion in the same six months last year, translating to headline earnings of R4.74 per share (R8.37 in the first half of the previous financial year). A critical look at the formal income statement, rather than the summary that forms part of Standard Bank’s presentation to shareholders, shows that things are even worse. Income before capital items and equity-accounted earnings declined by a much larger 54% than the 44% decrease in headline earnings. Profit attributable to shareholders plummeted by 72%, from R13.2 billion in the first half of 2019 to less than R3.8 billion in the last six months. The nature of a bank’s business gives a good overview of the economic and financial environment. Firstly, Standard Bank’s results validate Tshabalala’s warning with regards to the country’s looming debt problems. Big hit for tax coffers According to its income statement, Standard Bank saw its direct tax charge fall from more than R5 billion to less than R1.4 billion. It is worth repeating: government revenue is taking a knock of nearly R4 billion, from one business, in only six months. Standard Bank’s tax liability exceeded R10.5 billion in the financial year to December 2019, but will probably not reach R4 billion this year. Standard Bank reiterates the general view that the economy was already in dire straits before the Covid-19 pandemic hit due to interruptions in electricity supply, with the lockdown of businesses replacing the prospect of a modest economic recovery with expectations for a decline of 8.5% in real GDP. The consequences included large equity and bond market outflows, a further weakening of the exchange rate, and debt rating downgrades. Impact on clients Secondly, the bank’s results reflect the impact of the havoc of the past few months on people’s financial circumstances. Standard Bank CFO Arno Daehnke says the lockdown and curfew in SA had a significant impact on client activity, which is a key revenue driver for any bank. He presented startling figures to illustrate the financial stress of Standard Bank clients. Activities in branches declined by 42% and servicing via ATM fell by 21%. Clients cut their spending dramatically. For instance, spending using debit cards declined by a massive 68% in April, according to figures included in the presentation to shareholders. On the other hand, digital banking via cellphones and the internet increased by more than 70%, as the Covid-19 pandemic accelerated the move to digital banking platforms, supported by Standard Bank launching improved digital services during the same period. However, the basic revenue-earning activities – granting new loans – declined dramatically. New mortgage advances fell by 32% and new car loans dropped by 38%. The granting of new loans in Standard Bank’s personal and business bank division increased by only 7% during the six months under review, despite the large drop in interest rates that would have stimulated new lending under normal circumstances. Relief Standard Bank explains that the increase in loans is partly due to delayed repayments in terms of payment holidays granted as part of the bank’s assistance to distressed clients. Daehnke mentioned in his presentation that relief was granted on a total of R107 billion worth of loans. The deterioration of the economy and in household finances in SA can be seen clearly in the figures. Daehnke says customers were impacted by job losses and a reduction in their income. “Some 20% of our clients who were assisted with some kind of relief were either retrenched, or their businesses received zero turnover, or they received zero income. All were stable and performing before,” says Daehnke. Provision for bad debt increased sharply. Overall credit impairment charged to the income statement increased nearly threefold in comparison with the first six months last year. It increased from R4.2 billion to nearly R11.3 billion. This provision for bad debt for the six-month period exceeds that of the prior financial year by far – Standard Bank provided R7.9 billion for bad debt in the 12 months to December 2019. “Provisions increased across all stages and across all product portfolios,” according to the formal announcement. It is specifically the so-called Stage 3 provisions that showed a big increase, rising to 4.6% of the total loan portfolio. Stage 3 provisions include loans that are long overdue with a high risk of non-payment, as well as provisions of specific individual cases that warrant provision for non-payment. These provisions increased by more than R4 billion to a total of R21.1 billion at the end of June. The bank indicated that its provisions for bad debt indicate that the sectors that were mostly affected include general consumer businesses (primarily retail and hospitality), industrial companies, oil and fuel suppliers, and the real estate sector. Capital position still strong Management points out that the group’s capital position remained strong, with only a small deterioration in the capital adequacy ratio from a year ago. “The common equity tier 1 capital adequacy ratio of 12.6% at 30 June 2020 is within our own guidelines and well above the regulatory minimum of 7%,” says Daehnke. As expected, Standard Bank passed its interim dividend – it was announced earlier due to guidance from the SA Reserve Bank in exchange for some regulatory relief – but management did say that a final dividend will be possible. The results will not have come as a surprise, as the bank and several analysts have warned of the consequences of the extreme economic environment since the pandemic hit South Africa. The damage to the share had been done in April, when the share price drop from nearly R170 to the current levels of just below R110. Standard Bank is cautious about making promises related to its prospects, only saying that the group is well capitalised, has strong capabilities, and has the appetite to reignite growth in a post Covid-19 recovery.