There are no monetary shortcuts when it comes to tackling the country’s economic problems, insists South African Reserve Bank (Sarb) governor Lesetja Kganyago. Speaking during a webinar arranged by the University of Pretoria’s facility of economic and management sciences on Wednesday, Kganyago said talk of Sarb doing away with some long-standing policies – like inflation targeting – as a way to deal with the economic fallout of the Covid-19 crisis is not the best way to revive growth, as is not on the cards. He reminded his audience that targeting was introduced prior to South Africa becoming a democracy because chronically high inflation was not good for the economy. “The 1980s and early 1990s made it very clear that high inflation creates uncertainty, destroys savings, and undermines growth.” Targeting has delivered a long period of price stability By getting inflation under control, Sarb brought more certainty into the economy, which enabled people to make better longer-term decisions. “Inflation targeting has delivered a long period of price stability, comparable to the best years of the post-war Bretton Woods system, and should be considered a success for South Africa and for many other countries.” Kganyago noted that despite the severity of the Covid-19 crisis, inflation targeting as a policy continued to work well. “Even now, at this very difficult time for the economy, we can see the inflation targeting framework functioning properly, delivering historically low-interest rates in the context of low inflation.” He also pointed out that Sarb is not as all-powerful as many make it out to be. “While we would all like SA to reach permanently high growth, this is beyond the powers of a central bank. As we have often communicated, most of our growth problems should be addressed through structural reforms and confidence-boosting measures.” Read: Sarb shuns flawed policy to support economy Independence is power This can be seen in the Sarb only being able to control interest rates and but not load shedding. Kganyago then stressed that the key thing that gives Sarb its power is its ability to act independently from what the government wants. This can be seen how it managed to keep inflation down when compared to fellow middle-income country Turkey. In June, for example, Turkish inflation was 12.6% compared to 2.2% for SA. Both countries had growth less than 1% before the Covid-19 crisis, and both “have experienced big currency depreciations this year”. “So why are their inflation rates so different?” The difference comes down to independence of their respective central banks. “Since 2015, Turkey’s inflation rate has averaged 11.6% against a target of 5%. For the same period, South African inflation has been within our 3-6% target range, averaging 5%. Examples like this make it crystal clear that low inflation is not just a worldwide fact that countries can have ‘for free’. “If individual countries don’t make an effort, they can easily get stuck with high inflation.” Quantitative easing is not for SA Aside from inflation targeting and Sarb independence, quantitative easing (QE) is another issue that has been vigorously debated. QE is where a country’s central bank provides a government with funding by buying up an unusually large amount of its bonds. Kganyago made it clear this will not become Sarb policy anytime soon. “In the current circumstances … we think that a QE programme doesn’t make much sense for SA. Some advocates of QE argue that it is a free way of financing government deficits. This is not true. The funds created to buy bonds would flow into the interbank money market, lowering the cost of funding. “This cost of funding is, in fact, the repurchase rate [repo rate], which is our main monetary policy tool. To ensure that the repo rate stays where the MPC [monetary policy committee] wants it, despite the extra funds in the system, we would have to borrow those funds back ourselves, which could be costly. “To repeat: QE would not be ‘free money’.” No easy (monetary policy) way out But even if Kganyago and the Sarb get monetary policy right, it is not a guarantee that it will put the country on a growth path. He, for example, points out that SA’s debt situation has become critical and the rebound from the national lockdown appears weak when compared with other countries. “As a country, we need to find a path back to fiscal sustainability and growth.” The R70 billion in loans from the International Monetary Fund and other international lenders will see SA through the crisis but is ultimately “just a way to buy time”. In fact, Kganyago does not see more debt as the answer to the country’s woes. “If public sector borrowing were the way to achieve sustained growth, the last 10 years of debt accumulation should have been enough. The real task now is restoring our fiscal credibility and implementing structural reforms so the economy has a way to become more efficient and grow.” Kganyago said that for SA to make real progress, it will just have to face up to what needs to be done. “In many ways, as a country, we seem to be depressed, unable to get out of bed,” he said. “Yes, it’s winter, and it’s cold. But we can’t be like this. “Spring is coming, and inflation and interest rates are low. “We need to focus on the opportunities, get up, and get to work.”