Sea Ltd. jumped 9% after reporting a doubling in revenue, providing more ammunition to investors betting the Singaporean company backed by Tencent Holdings could become the next Asian internet colossus. Sea’s total revenue rose to $882 million in the three months ended June, driven by growth at e-commerce platform Shopee and gaming arm Garena. Its shares gained their most in a month even though it reported net losses widened more than 40% to $393 million, cementing its position as the world’s best-performing large-cap stock over the past 18 months. Swelling optimism the loss-making company may one day become both the Tencent and Alibaba of Southeast Asia boosted its New York shares by more than 810% during that period. That amazing rally, which has minted three billionaires over the course of its run, has stoked debate over whether the gaming, e-commerce and payments company is the next internet colossus or Exhibit A in a tech bubble destined to burst. “This gives us further confidence that the rapid shift to digital lifestyles is, in fact, a permanent and irreversible change that will drive significant growth opportunity for Sea over the long run,” Chief Executive Officer Forrest Li said on a conference call on Tuesday. Since its initial public offering in New York in 2017, Sea has been encouraging investors and analysts to focus on financial metrics that are not in compliance with the generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. Sea’s executives have said in the past it was aimed at helping its investors evaluate its operating performance. Executives said Tuesday it will stop reporting “adjusted” revenue and make other changes to its accounting methodology in response to Securities Exchange Commission inquiries. Gross merchandise volume (GMV) growth may remain above pre-pandemic levels through 2H, even with lockdowns easing, as its strengthening market share means it disproportionately benefits from a more-rapid adoption of digital services in Southeast Asia. -Matthew Kanterman, analyst   © 2020 Bloomberg 