Some expats working abroad may have to pay provisional tax to the South African Revenue Service (Sars) on their employment income earned abroad, by the end of next month. Prior to March 1, 2020, expats working abroad were exempt from paying income tax in South Africa on their foreign employment income if they were outside South Africa for more than 183 days in any 12-month period and, during the 183-day period, 60 days were spent continuously outside South Africa. Jenny Klein, Principal Associate at ENSafrica explains: “From March 1, 2020, these expats will only be exempt from paying tax in South Africa on the first R1.25 million of their employment income earned abroad. All earnings above R1.25 million will be taxable in South Africa. To avoid double taxation, expats will be able to claim a tax credit in South Africa for taxes paid abroad on the income which is also taxable in South Africa. As an example, if an expat is based in Country X and earns R2.5 million during the current tax year, the first R1.25 million earned would be exempt from income tax in South Africa and the remaining R1.25 million would be subject to South African income tax, after taking into account any foreign tax credits.” However, not all expats working abroad will be taxable in South Africa. Klein explains that “South Africans working abroad will only be taxable in South Africa on their foreign employment income if they are tax resident in South Africa. In other words, if the individual no longer qualifies as a resident of South Africa for tax purposes, they will continue to be liable for tax in South Africa on a source basis and this change will not impact them. Whether or not an expat is still resident in South Africa for tax purposes depends on their factual circumstances as well as any applicable double tax treaty.” With the potential tax liability for many South Africans working aboard, there are only a few options for these taxpayers to reduce their tax liability in South Africa. Somerset Morkel, the managing director of Serala Wealth Managers, is of the view that “Given the time constraints for expats prior to August, the only options of investing to reduce their income tax liability is to invest in a retirement annuity investment, which is capped at R350 000 per year and/or invest in a Section 12J investment, capped at R2.5 million per year. “However, expats would be well advised to seek local advice as to which type of investment to make as these investments require due care and consideration before investing.” When comparing a retirement annuity investment with a Section 12J investment, taxpayers must carefully consider their finances holistically, as both of these investment options have their pros and cons. However, before considering either option, it is critical for expats to first understand their tax liability in South Africa, so that the most ideal route can be taken before considering whether to make a tax-deductible investment. Jonty Sacks is a partner at Jaltech Fund Managers