Well-known asset management business Bridge Fund Managers has been acquired by fellow Cape Town-headquartered firm Counterpoint Asset Management, to form a multi-strategy investment management company with both retail and institutional offerings. The deal, which was officially announced on Tuesday, will see the combined businesses almost double assets under management to nearly R12 billion. Counterpoint acquired Bridge from Infinitus Holdings and the deal is expected to be effective from September 1, 2020. The transaction is however still subject to regulatory approvals. Read: Bridge Fund Managers aims to double AUM by 2020 “This is Counterpoint’s second acquisition in 2020, after merging with value manager RECM earlier this year. The combined businesses will manage assets of nearly R12 billion once the transaction is concluded,” the group noted in a statement. “Counterpoint’s major shareholders include successful Johannesburg-based financial service group Merchant West … one of SA’s biggest independent financial services providers with a history of over 20-years in the financial services sector,” it added. Commenting on the deal, Counterpoint CEO Linda Eedes said: “The asset management industry in South Africa is highly fragmented, and consolidation makes sense. This transaction provides both scale and synergies to the combined entity, as we continue to build a robust investment manager offering compelling investment propositions across the full asset class spectrum.” She noted that Bridge Fund Managers’ investment skills, product innovation and a national distribution capability would add to Counterpoint’s core investment management offering. “We are confident that both Bridge and Counterpoint clients will benefit greatly from the combination of the complimentary skill sets within our respective investment teams and diversified product ranges,” she said. Read/Listen: Market crashes happen, but so do recoveries Paul Stewart, CEO of Bridge Fund Managers, added: “The aim of this transaction is to provide a growth platform for the intellectual property and innovation that Bridge has created over the last eight years, to be combined with the experienced and skilled investment team at Counterpoint. “Having a long-term strategic shareholder like Counterpoint with the backing of Merchant West, that is committed to growth and accessing the opportunities that lie ahead, is very exciting.” Stewart and Eedes will act as joint CEOs “to ensure a smooth transition of their respective teams and clients” the group noted. “Bridge and Counterpoint will continue to operate separately for the next couple of months but will gradually integrate until fully merged by the end of the first quarter of 2021.” “Sam Houlie, Counterpoint’s Chief Investment Officer, will lead the combined investment teams. Ian Anderson, who currently leads the Bridge investment team, will continue to play an integral role in the investment process heading the real estate research team and he will continue to manage the Bridge Payers and Growers and listed property funds,” the statement said. Counterpoint said Bridge’s key institutional clients have indicated support for the transaction.