Japanese stocks slumped while the yen advanced after Prime Minister Shinzo Abe told officials he plans to resign, raising questions over the future of his signature stimulus policy. Volatility surged, with the benchmark Topix index sliding as much as 1.6%, wiping out a gain of 1.3% earlier. The currency, which has been kept in check by so-called Abenomics, rose as much as 0.4% against the dollar to 106.11.  “Abenomics may have had split views, but the fact that they put forward a clear policy of getting out of deflation was a positive for the equity markets,” said Hiroshi Matsumoto, head of Japan investment at Pictet Asset Management. “It’s not the end of the world for the Japanese economy, but we cannot clearly see who the successor will be. And there’s a question of how much Abenomics policies will be carried forward.” Abe came to power for the second time in 2012, touting new plans to revive the economy through unprecedented monetary easing and regulatory reform that was eventually labeled “Abenomics.” Few market participants had expected he would step down after his right hand man, Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga, said Abe should be able to serve out the remainder of his term as a party leader. The prime minister is expected to give a news conference at 5 p.m. Friday where he will discuss his health. The NHK had first reported that Abe plans to resign due to health concerns, a claim that was later confirmed by ruling party official Hiroshige Seko. Still, should Abe be replaced by Suga or former foreign minister Fumio Kishida, there would be policy continuity, analysts had said earlier. Finance Minister Taro Aso filling his shoes would also reduce pressure on the yen, they said. “It came as a surprise as traders weren’t expecting this to happen today,” said Masahiro Ichikawa, a senior strategist at Sumitomo Mitsui DS Asset Management Co. in Tokyo. “The yen could extend gains when more overseas players enter the market. But the advance will be limited as the market is expecting Japan’s current fiscal and monetary stimulus policies will be maintained amid the coronavirus crisis no matter who succeeds after Abe.” Market focus will also shift toward the Bank of Japan, where Governor Haruhiko Kuroda had worked hand-in-hand with the prime minister to combat deflation by introducing negative rates and buying huge amount of bonds and stocks. “Resignation brings into question support for Abenomics, and of course support for Kuroda’s BOJ ultra-easy policy,” said Rodrigo Catril, senior FX strategist at National Australia Bank Ltd. in Sydney, who sees the yen at 103 against the dollar by year end. Futures on Japan’s 10-year government notes dropped as much as 42 ticks to 151.30. Here is what other market participants are saying: CLSA Ltd. (Nicholas Smith, strategist) Mizuho Securities Co. (Kengo Suzuki, chief foreign-exchange strategist) Nordea Investment (Sebastien Galy, macro strategist) Malayan Banking Bhd. (Yanxi Tan, FX strategist) Asymmetric Advisors (Amir Anvarzadeh, a senior strategist)