As countries around the world report their second quarter GDP growth numbers, it is becoming clear how severely the global economy has been impacted by the Covid-19 crisis. The 32.9% annualised decline in the US for April, May and June, is the worst quarterly performance since 1948. As Ninety One’s co-head of quality Simon Brazier points out, however, a lot of the issues facing the world pre-date the pandemic. ‘We had trade tensions between Trump and Xi Jinping, and those are bound to continue,’ said Brazier. ‘Brexit continues to be a big issue, and we still don’t have a deal. Debt is an issue across the world for companies, individuals and, increasingly, for governments. And all of that constrains growth.’ The question that Ninety One is attempting to answer in the Ninety One Global Franchise fund is therefore how to find companies that will continue to grow, despite the environment. Search for quality ‘What we look for as investors are four characteristics in companies,’ said Brazier. ‘The first is a business model that will enable companies to grow over time, and great barriers to entry in sustainable growth areas. ‘The second is a sound financial model. These companies have strong balance sheets, and convert their profits into cash flow. ‘Thirdly, valuation is important to us. That is a cash flow-based valuation. ‘But what we spend most of our time looking at is allocation: what do companies do with their cashflow? Only if you invest in your company and your people can you build a business that will grow inter-generationally.’ That’s easy enough to say, but the reality is that these kinds of companies are exceptionally rare. Scarcity ‘There are only 28 stocks in global franchise fund,’ said Brazier. ‘We say that one of the smallest asset classes in the world is globally diversified, cash generative, dominant companies, that can continue to grow and invest over time. There aren’t many of them.’  Source: Ninety One There are particularly few available to South African investors on the JSE. Most commonly they are listed in the US, with a few in Europe or Japan. And the mega-cap tech stocks are not necessarily on this list either. In fact, the fund holds only seven of the 50 largest stocks in its benchmark – the MSCI All Country World Index – and has a 92% active share. ‘We don’t’ invest in some of the FAANG stocks – Apple, Amazon, Facebook or Alibaba,’ said Brazier. ‘Some of that is valuation. We just do not believe that the valuation of Amazon is justified by the growth prospects of that company. ‘But, also, in the case of some others we have fundamental issues. About three quarters of Apple’s revenue comes from hardware, for instance, and we worry that we may see anti-trust regulation coming though as Apple tries to monetise subscription services off its hardware.’ Allocation The fund does, however, own Microsoft, which Brazier noted has been extremely good at allocating cash under CEO Satya Nadella. ‘The companies in the fund convert 100% of their profits into cash,’ said Brazier. ‘Not only that, they have, since 2007, grown their cash flows at around 10% per annum, and the key is they have been able to reinvest that cash at 20% to 25% rates of return, compared to the market that is nearer to 15%.’ The importance of being able to identify and invest companies of this quality has been shown by the fund’s recent performance, Brazier believes.  Source: Morningstar & Ninety One ‘Despite everything that is going on in the world, the Global Franchise fund is up 9% in dollars over the past 12 months,’ he said. ‘And what you will find in the shape of our performance is that when markets are very strong, returning over 10% per annum, we just about keep up or are a little bit behind. But where we really deliver is in moderate markets or when markets fall. ‘That, we believe is where you really make money for clients: the preservation of capital on the downside rather than just delivering on the upside.’ Patrick Cairns is South Africa Editor at Citywire, which provides insight and information for professional investors globally. This article was first published on Citywire South Africa here, and republished with permission.