What started out to be a real world problem has rapidly spread into the financial markets with the fastest price declines recorded in history.  In years to come this financial crisis will become another statistic of markets.  In the next couple of days, weeks and months the emotions amplified by the health crisis requires a clear head and some context before making decisions. The purpose of this article is to acknowledge the high levels of prevailing uncertainty as we sit in isolation and quarantine and provide investors and clients with factual insight of previous bear markets. A bear market is typically defined by a decline in the market of more than 20%.  The events leading to a bear market is of academic importance and not covered in this article.  It is worth reminding ourselves that in every previous crisis similar levels of angst, emotion, distress and fear relating to asset values were prevalent to what we are experiencing currently. Analysis S&P500 monthly data since 1950 (period post second world war) was used to analyse market behaviour during bear markets. A total of 6 bear markets (before the current sell-off) were identified which means that this event happens on average 1 in every 10 years.  Bear markets are therefore regular events and any investment strategy should allow for this by ensuring that short term cash flow needs (3 years and shorter) are covered with cash or near cash (liquid) investments which are not impacted by market corrections. The bear markets identified and analysed occurred in 1962, 1969, 1973, 1987, 2000, 2007 and 2020. Characteristics of bear markets The table below summarises the different bear markets:  (the crash)1 The following is worth highlighting: The bear markets analysed are graphicly reflected below.  The bottom/low point of each bear market has been converged with each other so that the drawdown and recovery periods can be compared against each other.  We do not know if this crisis has bottomed yet, but for illustrative purposes it is included. Each bear market has been named by the year in which it started:  In addition to the points made in the previous section the following is highlighted from the above: Where to from here? Everyone is feeling the doom and gloom. The situation is real and we experience it every day. This article analysed previous periods of market distress with the aim of providing investors with context for decision making purposes to avoid making the financial impact real.  Below are some insights: There is a saying amongst historians and statiticians that “history does not repeat itself but certainly rhymes”.  The interpretation would be that after each significant event the human race adapts/evolves to avoid the mistake in future. The current crisis has its roots in a medical emergency which is arguably a first for the modern world. The reaction of financial markets has been brutal, but it is not the first time and it will certainly not be the last.  Rhyming indeed and it would be a mistake not to learn from the past: