Tumbling oil prices are adding a fresh ingredient to the coronavirus-fueled nervousness sweeping emerging markets, setting the stage for another week of turmoil. Brent slumped as much as 31% on Monday, Asian stocks nosedived and currencies from the Mexican peso to South African rand weakened after the world’s biggest crude producers failed to agree on production cuts last week, kicking off a price war. The declines extend a sell-off that overtook developing-nation markets at the end of last week as policy makers struggled to stave off the economic fallout from the spreading virus. “Close your eyes and sell emerging-market currencies, this is not a time to get too fancy and look for cost-effective crisis trades,” Jason Daw, head of emerging-market strategy at Societe Generale SA in Singapore, wrote in a client note. “Oil-market developments over the weekend can compound already fragile market sentiment.” While the prospect of coordinated easing by the world’s biggest central banks underpinned a rebound in emerging-market stocks earlier this month, doubts remain about the long-term effect on demand. The European Central Bank is due to meet Thursday in the wake of the Federal Reserve’s emergency rate cut last week. The Fed’s 50 basis-point reduction drove the Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index to its weakest level since January and government bond yields to unprecedented lows. “Monetary easing should continue, and cushion the blow from extended uncertainty and collapsing global trade,” a Deutsche Bank AG team including Drausio Giacomelli, head of emerging-markets strategy in New York, wrote in a report Friday. “We see both yields and currencies near bottom, but we doubt emerging-market growth-sensitive assets will rebound before convincing signs indicating the official containment of these shocks.” Emerging-market investors, when not fretting over coronavirus headlines, will be watching events related to Lebanese debt negotiations after the government said over the weekend it won’t pay a $1.2 billion Eurobond maturing Monday. Other key events this week include Chinese inflation data, and monetary policy decisions in Peru, Ukraine and Serbia. © 2020 Bloomberg