South Africa’s repo rate has been slashed by 100 basis points or 1% to 5.25%. This was announced by South African Reserve Bank (Sarb) governor Lesetja Kganyago on Thursday in a similar move to other central banks around the world as the economic fallout from the global coronavirus outbreak gets worse. Kganyago’s most aggressive repo rate cut since taking office in 2014 follows the conclusion of the Sarb’s three-day Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meeting in Pretoria. The cut will take the repo rate – the rate at which the Sarb lends money to commercial banks – to its lowest level since late 2013. It will see SA’s current prime commercial lending rate drop from 9.75% to 8.75%. “Globally, a once-healthy economic growth outlook has been revised down sharply due to the outbreak and spread of Covid-19. This coronavirus will negatively affect global and domestic economic growth through the first half of 2020, and potentially longer depending on steps taken to limit its spread,” Kganyago said in his post-MPC address. He noted that the domestic economic outlook remains fragile. “At this point, Covid-19 is likely to result in weaker demand for exports and domestic goods and services, but its impact on the economy could be partly offset by lower oil prices. We also expect disruptions to supply chains and to normal business operations. The Bank now expects the economy to contract by 0.2% in 2020. GDP growth is expected to rise to 1.0% in 2021 and to 1.6% in 2022,” he added. Kganyago said heightened risk sentiment in global markets has amplified domestic and fiscal risks. “This has pushed South Africa’s sovereign bond yields sharply higher and weakened the domestic currency, increasing risks to monetary policy. The steep drop in global interest rates implemented by advanced economies in recent days has partly offset those risks,” he said “Despite the general rise in risk, the significantly lower forecast for headline inflation has created space for monetary policy to respond to the rapid deterioration in economic conditions. Barring severe and persistent currency and oil shocks, inflation is expected to be well contained, remaining below the midpoint of the target in 2020 and close to the midpoint in 2021,” the governor noted. “Against this backdrop, the MPC decided to cut the repo rate by 100 basis points. This takes the repo rate to 5.25% per annum, with effect from 20 March 2020. The decision was unanimous,” said Kganyago. 