Passing away without a will means that your assets may not be distributed in the way that you expect them to be. However, having a will is no guarantee that your intentions will be carried out either. This is because not every will is properly, or thoughtfully, put together. From basic mistakes to unresolvable contradictions, some wills either cannot be executed or end up causing irreconcilable conflict among those left behind. To avoid these problems, Momentum Trust CEO Jeffrey Wiseman says that anyone drawing up their will needs to be conscious of three imperatives. “Firstly, a will must be legally correct,” Wiseman notes. “It must also be financially relevant, and, finally, you need to select a competent executor.” Legally correct One of the difficulties with a will is that a decision needs to be made about who should draw it up. “The question is: it a legal discussion because you are talking about the drafting of a legal document, or is it a financial discussion because you are talking about the transfer of assets when someone passes way?” Wiseman points out. “In our experience it’s a bit of both. “The financial advisor who has done proper financial planning should have done an estate plan and should have a view on how assets are to be passed,” he notes. “But by the same token, that person might not have the legal skills or be familiar with the requirements of the Wills Act and how to draft one.” The financial considerations are obviously critical to the will’s contents, but making sure that everything is stated in a way that is clear and unambiguous requires someone with the necessary legal expertise. For example, someone who wants to leave assets to their spouse can easily write that into a will. However, it is easy to overlook the possibility that your spouse may either pass away first or at the same time. Unless there are substitute provisions, this can be highly problematic. “We’ve also seen examples where a financial advisor has tried to draft a will and taken different clauses from different will templates, but because they didn’t look at it as a single legal document it contained contradictory provisions,” Wiseman says. Making a will clear is vital if you wish to prevent it from being legally challenged. Ambiguity raises the risk of disagreements and litigation. “In practice, if relationships between the beneficiaries are good, one can negotiate an appropriate outcome, but the problem is when there is hostility,” says Wiseman. “When someone passes away, money is involved. And when money is involved, personalities change.” On a more basic level, for a will to be legally correct it also has to be properly signed, dated and witnessed. Often wills fail just on these technical points. Financially relevant The second area of consideration is where the financial advisor’s role is most important. This is making sure that the way assets are distributed is thoughtfully considered. “For example, we had a deceased who was married in community of property and wanted to bequeath a house to his son from his first marriage,” Wiseman says. “But because he was married in community of property his second wife had a claim to 50% of the house. The net effect was that the son and step mother became co-owners of a fixed property, but they didn’t speak to each other.” This kind of scenario should be avoided if the estate plan is properly thought through. “We had another case where someone who was terminally ill bequeathed an amount to the caregiver who looked after him,” Wiseman recalls. “However, after the liabilities and expenses had been settled, the one third of his estate that each of his sons got was less than the bequest he left to the helper. “If he had had a clear view of what those numbers were likely to be, the decisions he made and how he structured the will might have been different.” Another issue that sometimes arises is that fixed assets are bequeathed to a trust, but no provision is made in the will to cover the costs of the trust, such as paying the trustees. These are the sorts of considerations that a financial advisor is best-placed to consider. “As a financial advisor it is more convenient sometimes to pass your client on to an expert to do the will, and it is important to have qualified legal people doing that,” Wiseman says. “But you do have to make sure that your financial and estate plan is taken into consideration.” Competent executor The final imperative is appointing someone with the necessary skill and expertise to actually deal with your estate. Many people assume that they can appoint anybody as an executor, and that they will save money if that person is a friend or family member who won’t expect to be paid. While this is legally permissible, it’s not necessarily wise. “Winding up a deceased estate is a much more complex process than people give it credit for, and if the executor is not competent you are going to have problems,” says Wiseman. “Both clients and financial advisors often don’t seem to appreciate what the will deals with and what it doesn’t, and how the money flows on death.” It is not just about dividing up assets, but also paying a range of expenses and liabilities, dealing with the master of the court, and any potential disputes. “The estate administration process is complex,” Wiseman says. “The person you select as executor must be competent to deal with this world.”