Forex market analyst Rahul Sharma of Forex Brokers SA says the forex market is one of the most liquid markets in the world. “Retail forex trading accounts for 5.5% of the global forex market where banks, institutional investors, businesses and governments take part. In 2019, the daily turnover of the global forex market was around $6.59 trillion. ”This can make it attractive for investors but the key to investing in the forex market is ensuring that you are educated,” he says. There are three ways to trade in the forex market: What are the risks? “Forex trading is very risky for most retail investors as the forex markets are very volatile. Markets move constantly, making it difficult for traders to stay updated or keep track or to predict future movements,” Sharma warns. He says there are three major risks: “Like any other investment, there is no guarantee of profits in forex trading. It is a known industry fact that almost 60-70% of retail traders lose money in forex trading, mostly due to poor money management and the use of unsafe leverage. It is important for new traders to learn about forex, understanding of charts, supply-demand, and practice on demo before they start trading,” Sharma says. What protection do South African investors have? The FSCA regulates and oversees capital markets in South Africa, including the forex market. However, not all forex brokers are necessarily registered with the FSCA. The onus is on the investor to check the registration of the forex broker before entering any transactions. Brokers who fall under the FSCA must have a local presence with a local office and at least one director residing in South Africa. Over the counter (OTC) derivative providers, which includes CFD brokers, now also fall under the FSCA. This means all their transactions now go to the FSCA’s trade repository. Sharma says this will enable the FSCA to check all trading activity at the broker and ensure best practices are followed at the broker’s end. “As per the FSCA’s new regulations, brokers need to ensure that clients are knowledgeable enough before they can open a live account. Clients, in turn, are also required to show their capital adequacy, which will ensure that only traders with a professional background and financial markets literacy can invest in the forex market,” he says. What to look out for when choosing a forex broker: Regulation: The broker should be registered with the FSCA and other major regulators such as the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) or the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC). Ask the broker for their FSP number and then verify it on the FSCA’s search portal. Reputation and history: Sharma recommends that you ask the following questions: Trading fees: Always look out for overall fees. “During our research, we found that some brokers charge low commission or fees per trade but charge very high fees on services such as withdrawals, maintenance charges and inactivity fees,” Sharma notes. Available asset classes: Some traders prefer to trade commodities, while some want to trade rand-based currency pairs specifically. Always check if your desired asset class is available with the broker, and the fees should be as low as possible for that instrument. Trading conditions: Check the platforms offered by the broker. Do they offer a rand-based account? What are their available order types and what is their order execution type? Does the broker have any history of freezing on its platform during normal market hours? “Finally, make sure you read the broker’s terms carefully. You can also read independent reviews on broker comparison sites such as Forexbrokers.co.za, where we have compared the fees of some FSCA-regulated brokers,” says Sharma. “Our site also compares about eight other trust factors that we consider to be important in a forex broker for the safety of investors.” Brought to you by Forex Brokers SA.