Traders bracing for another rough week sought refugee in haven assets, sending global bond yields down to new record lows. As markets reopened, rate-cut expectations spurred by the Federal Reserve’s announcement on Friday that it was ready to act rippled through yield curves. The dollar and commodity currencies weakened in early trading. The drumbeat of bad news surrounding the virus outbreak continued over the weekend. Italy reported a 50% surge in new coronavirus cases and the US and Japan issued “do-not-travel” warnings for affected regions of Italy and South Korea. The US, Australia and Thailand reported their first fatalities. “The market is dominated by pessimism on the back of the coronavirus,” said Hidehiro Joke, a bond strategist at Mizuho Securities in Tokyo. “The market is urging the Fed to cut rates. Ten-year Treasury yields falling below 1% cannot be ruled out.”  Treasury two-year yields fell 17 basis points, while Australia and New Zealand’s bonds also saw record low yields amid mounting concerns about the health of the Chinese economy. The Chinese government reported on Saturday that February manufacturing activity plunged to its lowest level on record. Global equities suffered their sharpest declines since the 2008 financial crisis last week, while commodities plunged on concern the spread of the coronavirus will tip the global economy into a recession. The New Zealand dollar dropped more than 1% to its lowest level since August 2015 and the Australian dollar traded as much as 0.8% lower before both pared the declines. “Given the fear factor that’s in the market right now, the risk relative to our base case scenario of just a few months ago, is that safe haven currencies including yen, the swiss franc and the dollar continue to outperform,” said Steven Englander, Standard Chartered Bank’s head of North America macro strategy. China’s manufacturing purchasing managers’ index plunged to 35.7 in February from 50 the previous month, according to data released by the National Bureau of Statistics, much lower than the median estimate of economists. The non-manufacturing gauge also fell to 29.6, its lowest ever. Both were well below 50, which denotes contraction. Investors are looking to not just the Fed and other major central banks — even with their limited ammunition — to contain the fallout from the outbreak. Fed chairman Jerome Powell in a statement on Friday said the US central bank is ready to cut interest rates if needed as the epidemic “poses evolving risks” to the American economy. Australia’s central bank is all-but certain to cut interest rates Tuesday, money markets show. ANZ Bank New Zealand now sees the Reserve Bank of New Zealand slashing its benchmark rate to 0.25% by May. “I can see rates continuing to fall in the near term as there is no sign of a cure or vaccine,” said Priya Misra, head of global rates strategy at TD Securities. “Even though the mortality is lower than SARS, the magnitude and geographical spread of affected people is massive. Add to that travel restrictions and fear.” Here’s a round-up of comments from analysts and strategists:: Hasnain Malik, the Dubai-based head of equity strategy at Tellimer: Jason Daw, head of emerging markets strategy at Societe Generale SA in Singapore, wrote in a note: Mansoor Mohi-uddin, a Singapore-based senior strategist at NatWest Markets: Stephen Innes, the Bangkok-based chief market strategist at Axicorp: Patricia Ribeiro, a New York-based senior portfolio manager at American Century Investments: Richard Segal, a senior analyst at Manulife Investment Management in London: Divye Arora, a portfolio manager at Daman Investments in Dubai: Edward Bell, a commodity analyst at Emirates NBD in Dubai: Han Tan, a Kuala Lumpur-based market analyst at FXTM: