Economies around the world will start to get a sense of the damage wrought by the coronavirus this week, as global central banks and governments continue their running battle to allay market fears over the scale of their response. In the U.S., a Goldman Sachs analysis showed weekly filings for unemployment benefits are poised to surge to a record 2.25 million, up from 281,000, as business shut down because of coronavirus-containment efforts. Purchasing manager indexes in Europe, the U.S. and Asia will be the first clear signs of the scale of the economic hit in those countries, and South Korean export numbers will be closely watched as a barometer for global commerce. While traditional central bank calendars mean little in an age of emergency actions, the Bank of England, which has already cut interest rates twice this month, holds a scheduled meeting. Monetary policy announcements are also due from Colombia, Hungary and Nigeria. Here’s what happened last week and below is our wrap of what else is coming up in the world economy. U.S. and Canada
With no Fed speeches scheduled due to the virus outbreak, all eyes are on the economic data rolling in for signals of how deep the economic hit will be. Thursday’s report on initial jobless claims for the week ended March 21 will be the first to show the depth and breadth of the pandemic on the U.S. labor market, with estimates running as high as 4 million — almost 20 times the typical level in the past year. The IHS Markit PMI measures on Tuesday and Michigan consumer sentiment on Friday will give a sense of how shutdowns are hitting manufacturers and Americans’ opinions of the economy. In Canada, where half a million people, or about 2.5% of the labor force, applied for jobless claims last week, consumer confidence data on Monday is likely to provide another sign the country may already be in a deep recession. Asia
After a week of extraordinary central bank and fiscal action across Asia, things are set to quieten a little — at least according to the list of scheduled events. South Korean exports for the first 20 days of March will be closely watched on Monday as a barometer for global commerce, and Japan releases its PMI estimate a day later. The Bank of Thailand meets on Wednesday after an emergency rate cut late last week. Europe, Middle East and Africa
The euro-area economy is due to suffer the worst output ever in its two decades of existence, according to Bloomberg Economics, and surveys this week will give a first sense of the downturn. Confidence gauges and initial PMIs for Germany, France and the euro area as a whole are set to show dire readings. PMI for the U.K. also are due, before the scheduled BOE decision on Thursday. There are central bank meetings in Hungary, the Czech Republic and Albania. Kenya’s central bank is likely to lower its key interest rate for a third consecutive meeting Monday. After announcing two stimulus packages in a week, the Nigerian central bank may hold on Tuesday as it seeks to shore up its currency. In South Africa, a possible downgrade to junk by Moody’s Investors Service on Friday could weaken the rand even further. Turkey publishes figures on tourism, confidence and manufacturing. Latin America
Central bank publications this week in Brazil offer up-to-date readings on Latin America’s biggest economy. The minutes of the central bank’s March 18 meeting — where it cut the key rate to a record-low 3.75% — may help explain policy makers’ hawkish tone amid the unprecedented global pandemic, while the quarterly inflation report will serve up technical assessments, scenario analysis and should address any shifts in thinking and reaction function due to the outbreak. The central banks of Colombia and Guatemala both have scheduled meetings and may cut rates for the first time since 2018 and 2017, respectively. © 2020 Bloomberg L.P.