 NOMPU SIZIBA: The opportunity to buy a property as a home for a first-time buyer, or for a buy-to-let, couldn’t be better than today. That’s according to one property player, Only Realty. A combination of relatively lower interest rates and the recent gift from National Treasury, which sees transfer duties only payable for properties above the million-rand mark, could help propel buyers into these markets. Well, to give us some insight into what the possibilities are, I’m joined on the line by Grant Smee, the founder of EPiC, and MD for Only Realty. Thanks very much for joining us, Grant. For first-time buyers looking to buy in the housing market, typically what sort of price tag would they be looking to start off with? GRANT SMEE: Good evening, Nompu. I think first-time buyers tend to market and the problem with the be generalisation of the property market as a whole. There are actually pockets of excellence, so you look at areas like Western Cape, where the average price is around the R1 million, R1.2 million mark, but there are areas such as Gauteng, where you probably get some first-time buyers getting into the market between R500 000 and R700 000. So that’s very challenging. NOMPU SIZIBA: In your view, how big a deal was Finance Minister Tito Mboweni’s budget announcement that transfer duties will only be payable for property transactions above a million rand? And that’s from R900 000 before. How much of a game-changer is that going to be, particularly for first-time buyers? GRANT SMEE: I’ve tried to …… align with the rest of the property market, because the property market really has been looking for some good news to attach itself to. I don’t think that the change, the R100 000 threshold movement, really has a massive overall effect on buying a home, because buying a home is so expensive. With that R100 000 threshold, it actually only translates into a R300 000 cash upfront saving for a buyer in the million-rand mark. I do find, however, that most first-time buyers are buying much lower than that, anyway, so it doesn’t really have in my opinion a massive benefit for first-time buyers. Time to buy? NOMPU SIZIBA: I hear you. I tried to raise a couple of points in the introduction as to what makes buying a property now attractive. But, in your view, why do you think this is the best time for people to consider moving from, say, renting to buying? GRANT SMEE: The first one is to always get invested as soon as possible. So having an asset as early as possible is always more advisable than now that the market has moved down. The current market is definitely a buyer’s market. There is a lot of stock on the market across the board, from retail sales to individuals selling homes, as well as developers. So there is a massive amount of price pressure on sellers, and that therefore gives buyers plenty of opportunity and options to buy into the market. NOMPU SIZIBA: What’s your advice to first-time buyers who can’t perhaps afford to buy a house outright, but can go through the rent-to-own property type of system? What are some of the options that are available there? GRANT SMEE: Rent-to-own is a very interesting system. It does rely heavily on the fact that …… sellers who are open to the structure of you renting while you’re saving up for the deposit, getting yourself financially ready to buy. However, because the market is so tough at the moment it’s something that buyers and prospective buyers should approach early on in the negotiations, to make sellers aware that they do have other options outside of the traditional sale. And part two is finding an expert that understands when to buy. I think a lot of people profess to do it, but find a price to …… in the market putting those agreements in place. Hidden costs NOMPU SIZIBA: So beyond the affordability of a bond, first-time buyers would need to be aware of the costs that come with running a property, especially because there’s no longer a landlord to call on – assuming that somebody has moved from being a tenant to an owner. Just give us an explanation of what some of the costs are associated with being a property owner are. GRANT SMEE: You’ve mentioned maintenance already. Maintenance is certainly something you need consider – the …… geysers, the property itself, overall property. There are other costs which you buy into, such as the  type of scheme, which is …… meet in, you need to consider the cost of levies and any special things that might come with the maintenance of your overall communal areas. And then rates and taxes are something that renters don’t pay and owners …… foot the bill for, so you also take on the cost of rates and taxes to the local municipality. Interest rates NOMPU SIZIBA: How sensitive should people be to interest rates? We’re told that they’re at relatively low levels, and we’re hoping that the Reserve Bank will cut further, but then of course when things change they may well raise rates. GRANT SMEE: Absolutely. We’re in quite a low interest-rate cycle at the moment, and I do realise the banks or the Reserve Bank may decrease rates now. But you need to have a 20-year view on that, because you own a property in general if you have a bond for 20 years. You can get a fixed rate now, so you aren’t sensitive to those movements, or make sure that, as time goes on, you are putting away …… just in case interest rates do move, because I do feel at the moment we are in a low cycle, and though they could potentially move downward, we are going to see a period of time when interest rates will go to the norm of 10, 15 years ago. NOMPU SIZIBA: Grant, thank you very much for coming on the show.