Like those jetpacks we were promised, while 2020 was supposed to be the year of a million Tesla robotaxis — sorry, potential robotaxis — it may end up being the year of … the cyberventilator? OK, I made up that word. The point is, who predicted Tesla CEO Elon Musk, almost a year on from touting the million strong robofleet, would now be floating the idea of joining in with government-directed production of equipment to treat Covid-19 patients? Whether that actually happens is anyone’s guess. Musk has expressed skepticism about the threat posed by the novel virus and this week engaged in an effective stand-off with local officials seeking to shut down non-essential business activity — like making high-end electric cars — in order to curb infection. His apparent willingness to consider the ventilator idea came in a tweet and, without wishing to rush to judgment, we all know how reliable those can be. For investors seeking to make sense of this sideshow, the more salient point concerns what actually is happening to Tesla’s production and sale of vehicles in this most unexpected of quarters. Tesla came into the year on what can only be described as a ludicrous wave of enthusiasm for the stock. Having jumped almost two thirds between October’s third-quarter results announcement and New Year’s Eve, it then more than doubled again in the space of seven weeks. Now it is back roughly where it began January, having round-tripped almost $100 billion of market cap in less than three months. After this latest drubbing, Tesla now trades at a mere … 138 times consensus GAAP earnings for 2020.  The supporting narrative — and I use supporting in its loosest sense — is that Tesla is finally sort-of self-funding and, as ever, growing like an electrified weed. Yet the self-funding aspect is highly questionable. And while Tesla has built a new factory in China and raised its sales targets, revenue growth stalled out in the second half of 2019. It was jarring in February when, just days before the stock peaked, Tesla sold another $2.3 billion of equity. While investors were practically begging the company to dilute them, the issuance didn’t really square with the prevailing narrative that Tesla didn’t need the money. As it turns out, of course, Covid-19 makes that extra cash very welcome indeed. There is a financial impulse that fits with Tesla’s efforts to keep the lines running in Fremont, California. Even as vehicle output has almost quadrupled in the past two years, profits have been slow to materialise. When they have, they’ve been exceedingly small. The $120-billion-odd gain in market cap between mid-October and mid-February came on the back of two quarters of positive net income that added up to about $250 million, along with $1.4 billion of positive free cash flow that relied largely on positive working capital effects and slashing the original capex budget. In other words, we are yet to see significant operating leverage on the upside. On the downside, however, he have a recent example of what happens when Tesla falls short on expectations. Roughly a year ago, Tesla reported a big drop in vehicle sales in the first quarter, burning through almost $1 billion of cash in the process, despite slashing capex. To justify even today’s diminished stock price, Tesla must maintain momentum. Without it, negative operating leverage shows up pretty quickly in red ink. More importantly, it dents confidence in the high-growth, highly-profitable future underpinning the option value embedded in that triple-figure earnings multiple. Call it the potential robotaxi factor. With Tesla sitting on $6.3 billion of cash at the end of December, and having raised another $2 billion or so, it has a big cushion to absorb some sort of temporary shutdown of Fremont. Even so, the company’s 2025 bonds now yield more than 10%. The last time they yielded anything like that, the stock was less than half today’s level. Besides general dislocation in the more speculative end of the bond market, we simply have no idea how deep or long the acute phase of the Covid-19 crisis will last. We can, on the other hand, reasonably assume that buying (or even driving) premium vehicles of any sort will not be a priority for many while it is going on. As an investment, Tesla’s momentum machine will now be tested on an indicator less familiar with this stock but all-too familiar in the autos sector: resiliency. © 2020 Bloomberg