Courtesy of SABC News The South African government may place the country under lockdown for 21 days in an effort to control the spread of Covid-19, only allowing for essential personnel and those needing medical care to leave their homes for a limited period. Essential personnel refers to doctors, nurses and police while other citizens will only be allowed to leave their houses under strictly controlled circumstances. Essential services like clinics, pharmacies, hospitals and food stores will remain open. An overview of the plan seen by Moneyweb also makes provision for homeless people to be given alternative accommodation, either where they are or at identified sites. President Cyril Ramaphosa has kept the country on tenterhooks all day as South Africans wait to hear his address later this evening. He is due to speak at 19:30, and is expected to make announcements on how regulations will be tightened to curb the spread of the virus. The number of confirmed cases rose sharply today with no sign of slowing since the first case was reported on March 5. Read: Covid-19: Averting a national disaster Since Ramaphosa announced a national state of disaster on March 15, which was followed by a number of regulations restricting gatherings and movement, cases have risen from 61 to 402. Read: Breaking: SA Covid-19 cases surge past 400 Members of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) have already been deployed to assist police in their law-enforcement efforts, with some being spotted around Johannesburg on Monday. Read: SANDF on standby to assist in Covid-19 mitigation efforts The plan also proposes house-to-house screening and testing, bringing volunteers in to assist. It also includes the relaxation of testing requirements in order to identify as many cases of people infected with Covid-19 as possible. This will be done with a corresponding increase in laboratory services. The ultimate objective is to ensure that hospitals are not overwhelmed with unnecessary cases. Treatment will be given in order of severity, with serious cases receiving centralised treatment while mild cases will receive decentralised care. The proposed plan is modelled on China’s lockdown strategy, which has been lauded for seemingly stopping the rate of new infections while these numbers rise in other areas across the world. Read: The scariest thing about Covid-19 