With the number of confirmed coronavirus cases in South Africa breaching the 200 mark and set to climb, the authorities said they are desperately trying to slow the disease’s spread to avoid swamping the health-care system. The proportion of the population that could be infected “can go to about 60%,” Health Minister Zweli Mkhize told reporters in the central city of Bloemfontein on Friday. “It doesn’t mean those people are going to die, it doesn’t mean all of them are going to get it at the same time, it doesn’t mean we’ve now got an apocalypse.” President Cyril Ramaphosa declared the virus a national disaster on March 15, closing schools and some borders and imposing travel bans on foreigners who recently visited 10 nations hardest-hit by the disease, including the US, UK, China and Italy. South Africa has confirmed 202 cases of Covid-19 since the first one was detected on March 5. Two patients have recovered and there haven’t been any fatalities. The government isn’t considering imposing a state of emergency at this juncture because existing regulations give it sufficient powers to lock down areas or restrict movement, Justice Minister Ronald Lamola told reporters in Pretoria, the capital. Police Minister Bheki Cele said the military will only be deployed to help combat the disease if a state of emergency is declared. On Thursday, Mkhize said the government wants to ramp up the number of people being tested to 30 000 a day by mid-April, compared with 5 000 now. South Africa’s case count is the highest in sub-Saharan Africa. The country should prepare for a “difficult” three or four months, Angelique Coetzee, the chairwoman of the South African Medical Association, said at the briefing. “We are still not in, as people like to call it, the eye of the storm, but we are moving into it,” she said. Like South Africa, more than 20 other African countries this week imposed travel bans or shut their borders altogether, and many have closed schools and banned large gatherings, including religious festivals. “It’s wise to put these measures in place,” Matshidiso Moeti, the World Health Organization’s regional director for Africa, said in a phone briefing Thursday. “The earlier, the better.” Other key developments: © 2020 Bloomberg