The Brazilian re-insurer that made false claims about a Berkshire Hathaway Inc. investment is scrambling to contain the fallout. IRB Brasil Resseguros SA’s chief executive officer and finance chief resigned late Wednesday, just days after its chairman quit. In an impromptu conference call Thursday, their interim replacements sought to calm investors and move past the month-long drama that has wiped out more than half its market value, about $5.3 billion through Wednesday’s close. The Berkshire issue is “a serious problem,” said interim Chairman Pedro Guimaraes, adding that IRB’s board acted quickly in changing management and an internal investigation will be conducted. “We don’t condone and will never condone any kind of wrongdoing.” IRB’s stock has been in freefall since February 2, when short seller Squadra Investments released a 150-page report disclosing a bearish position and questioning IRB’s profit figures. IRB management began quietly reassuring investors in conference calls that all was well and later hyped that supposed Berkshire stake as proof, according to analysts on the call and local media reports. Not true, said Warren Buffett’s holding company this week, and the stock tumbled anew. “Berkshire Hathaway Inc. is not currently a shareholder of IRB, it has never been a shareholder of IRB and it has no intention of becoming a shareholder of IRB,” Berkshire said in a statement on Tuesday. Executive exits IRB announced the exit of CEO Jose Carlos Cardoso and CFO Fernando Passos in a regulatory filing and said Werner Suffert, a former member of the board, took over as CFO and interim CEO. Chairman Ivan Monteiro resigned on February 28. His interim replacement, Guimaraes, is the CEO of state bank Caixa Economica Federal. Following Thursday’s call, IRB Brasil initially rose as much as 5.8% before those gains were erased. It follows a 32% tumble on Wednesday after Berkshire’s denial. While fairly common in other parts of the world, it’s rare in Brazil for short sellers to publicly point the finger at a specific company and lay out their rationale as thoroughly as Squadra did in its report. Squadra, with 4.2 billion reais ($917 million) in assets under management, said IRB included one-offs in its recurring pre-tax income figures. IRB, which has declared itself the most profitable company in the global re-insurance sector, pushed back and called up banks including Morgan Stanley and Santander Brasil to explain how its higher-than-average return on equity is sustainable. Guimaraes said on the call that while the board is comfortable with IRB’s balance sheet, it plans to boost transparency in the information that it releases. Alleged claims Brazil’s Eleven Financial Research said in a report that it took part in a conference call held by IRB on Monday in which executives claimed Berkshire Hathaway International Insurance Ltd. had boosted its stake and touted a close relationship with Berkshire’s vice chairman of insurance operations, Ajit Jain. Newspaper Valor Economico reported the claims. “There have been recent stories in the Brazilian press that Berkshire Hathaway Inc. is a shareholder of IRB Brasil Re,” Berkshire said in the statement. “Those stories are incorrect.” Analysts at Citigroup Inc. downgraded the stock Wednesday, and Bank of America put it under review. The stock never once had a sell rating from analysts since its 2017 initial public offering. “We are no longer confident that we have a reasonable basis for valuing IRB,” Bank of America analysts led by Mario Pierry wrote in a report. “Investors should no longer rely on our previous recommendation and estimates.” © 2020 Bloomberg