It may be hard to remember in the current market turmoil, but 2019 was not a bad year for South African stocks. The FTSE/JSE All Share Index was up 12.0%. It was also a pretty good year for active managers. According to the latest S&P Indices vs Active (SPIVA) scorecard, 55.94% of South African active equity funds out-performed the S&P South Africa Domestic Shareholder Weighted (DWS) Capped Index over the 12 months to 31 December 2019. This is the second consecutive year in which a majority of active funds have beaten this benchmark. In 2018, 61.42% of active managers out-performed. Read: Local active managers outperformed in 2018 It is also the second year in a row in which the average active fund has delivered an above-benchmark return. As the table below shows, most active strategies have been able to deliver value since the end of 2017, although this was true for the three years prior to that. Source: S&P Dow Jones Indices Over longer periods, however, a majority of active funds continue to lag the benchmark. As the table below shows, the number of active managers outperforming the S&P South Africa DSW Capped Index over three and five years declines as the measurement period is extended to three and five years. It is also worth noting that less than a tenth of local active managers managed to beat the large cap S&P South Africa Top 50 Index over these longer periods. This shows how the larger stocks on the JSE have been far stronger than mid and small caps. Source: S&P Dow Jones Indices “The large-cap benchmark, the S&P South Africa 50, was up 10.4% in 2019,” S&P Dow Jones noted. “It outperformed the S&P South Africa DSW Capped Index by over 3% annualized over each of the one-, three-, and five-year periods, demonstrating the tendency of the largest 50 stocks to outperform in recent years.” Going global Last year was also a particularly good year for South Africans invested in funds exposed to international stocks. The average global equity fund returned over 20% in rand terms. As the table below shows, however, this was well below the return of the S&P Global 1200 Index. The average active global equity manager has under-performed this benchmark over all time periods. Source: S&P Dow Jones Indices In general, active South African global equity funds have a poor record against the S&P benchmark. Only a little more than a quarter out-performed the index in 2019, and barely 5% have done so over a five year period. Source: S&P Dow Jones Indices