Growing up in Eastrand, Zanele Morrison, never imagined that she would become the voice of Africa’s biggest stock exchange. But today she is living her ‘wildest dream’. “We think that the game is not changing, but I see it every day, I see that somebody has come to lift the glass ceiling, I see the inclusivity and I see the diversion,” says Zanele Morrison, the director of corporate communication and marketing at the Johannesburg Stock Exchange. Out of the 388 listed companies on the JSE, only less than 5% in the top 100 have female representation. Morrison who has been in the industry for more than 25 years, says that she is hopeful that with the rise of highly educated women, there will be an increase of women in leadership roles within companies at an earlier stage of their careers; because the future of boardrooms is female. “I see young female professionals rising up to senior positions, we are making progress and it is very slow. We just have to keep raising the volume and the amount of noise we make about how important it actually is for listed entities [to listen to the call for female representation in executive levels.],” Morris says. In the JSE, the past two CEOs have been female and the current chairperson of the stock exchange is female. Morris says five out of eight executives at the JSE are also women, 67% of the JSE board members are female representatives and this bottles down to the employees as 311 (53.15%) out of the 397 employees are women. She says this is how the JSE is setting the agenda for other listed companies to follow. “We do believe that it is our role to set the tone for what we believe our listed entities need to follow. We are not just setting the role in terms of the hiring, but also in our engagements. We are setting the example in a true and authentic way,” Morris says. A better working environment According to a report by Credit Suisse Research Institute, which conducted a report on 3,000 companies, for six years globally, proved that there is a correlation between women on boards and improved performance at companies. “We find clear evidence that companies with a higher proportion of women in decision-making roles continue to generate higher returns on equity while running more conservative balance sheets,” the report says. It says that where women account for the majority, in the top management, the businesses show superior sales growth, high cash flow returns on investments and lower leverage, and higher valuations. “Companies with at least one woman on the board have outperformed in terms of share price performance those with no women on the board over the course of the past six years,” it says. However, there are still many aspects of business performance that do improve when there are diverse viewpoints around the boardroom table. But the full potential of this can never be seen unless organisations give the pool of new talent a fair chance. Opening doors Morris says that the reason JSE-listed companies have little female representation is not that, there is a lack of talent for suitable female candidates. “I do not think there is a lack of talent or calibre of women for these roles. What is lacking is to give those people opportunities to take those roles. And not just general people and not just well-known people, but people who are extremely qualified and women who are quietly sitting in senior roles and who are doing amazing work,” she says. Morris says that she has noticed that most companies tend to appoint the same people into managerial roles. “We tend to want to choose face, we tend to want to choose the same people over -and -over again, versus investing in the development of women and putting them into a senior role and allowing them to learn for a period of a year,” she says, “the biggest problem is getting that first board position”. Anita Bosch, the USB Research Chair for Women at Work adds “the pool of talented women suitable for board directorships is steadily increasing and gains have been made, but they are too erratic and too small to correct the gender imbalance…directors just need to look outside their normal, comfortable networks to find them”. According to the BWASA Women in Leadership Census, from 2012 to 2017, only 26 JSE-listed companies consistently had a 25%+ female board, while approximately 45 of the 277 companies had no female directors at all. The BWASA Women in Leadership Census calls for a voluntary target of 30% female board members as “reasonable and feasible”, with 40% as a stretch target. Currently, there are no legislation requiring companies to include women on their boards of directors, as a listing requirement at the JSE. “For instance, there have been no consequences for JSE-listed companies that have not complied with listing requirements related to the advancement of gender diversity at board level,” Bosch says. As women collectively call for fair gender representation in the workplace, it is also important that they work on themselves so that when the time arises, they are fully equipped to take on leadership roles. 