Banks, and their shareholders have a special affinity for economic growth, consumer- and business confidence, low unemployment and certainty in government policy. Thus the presentation of Standard Bank’s results for the year to December 31, 2019, was a somewhat sombre event despite the relatively satisfactory results in the current difficult economic environment. Announcing an increase of only 1% in headline earnings and headline earnings per share, CEO Sim Tshabalala hinted that results could have been much better if only the business environment in SA were a bit easier. He said that the world economy struggled during the last 12 months, which in turn impacted the SA economy. This led to repeated downward revisions of economic growth. Closer to home, continued electricity disruptions impacted the economy, he said, referring to the announcement of the latest GDP figures that showed that the SA economy grew by only 0.2% in 2019. “Standard Bank’s economists tell me that the economy could have increased by 0.8% last year without load shedding,” said Tshabalala. However, Standard Bank’s businesses in SA still performed quite well. The Personal and Business Banking- (PBB) and Commercial and Investment Banking (CIB) units both performed well. The banking side of the business enjoyed strong growth in loan advances, interest revenue and non-interest revenue. Chief Financial Officer Arno Daehnke pointed out to shareholders that interest revenue increased by 6%, while non-interest revenue increased by 5%. Operating cost increased by a lower 4%, resulting in an increase in operating profit of R7 billion to R134 billion, compared with R127 billion in the previous financial year. The increase in earnings was enough to cover the hefty increase in provisions for bad and doubtful debt, which rose a hefty 23% to R8 billion. Daehnke advised shareholders that the increase in bad debt was expected due to the final write-off of old debt. He said that the arrears book actually looks better now than a year ago. The train smash is revealed in the next two lines of the income statement. Standard Bank took a big hit when its investment in ICBC Standard (ICBCS) – part of the Chinese banking group Industrial and Commercial Bank of China – suffered a huge loss, and also as a result of the colossal size of the loss that prompted a write-down of the value of the investment. “The difference in the good performance, the banking interest and the results of the group overall is due to the performance of ICBCS,” said Tshabalala. “As a 40% shareholder, we could not do much.” The cause of the ICBCS loss is what keeps banking officials up at night: the huge (avoidable) mistake of large exposure to a single client and a bad turn of events before it repays its loan. Standard Bank reported that ICBCS recorded a disappointing set of results in its 2019 financial year. It suffered a loss of $248 million, of which $198 million was related to a single client that could not repay its loan. ICBCS granted a huge loan to US oil refinery Philadelphia Energy Solutions, in June last year. Reuters reported that an explosion at the plant a few days later damaged critical equipment at the refinery and the plant closed down immediately. It was eventually liquidated, forcing ICBCS to sell some 3 million barrels of crude oil at liquidation prices. Standard Bank’s 40% share in the ICBC Standard loss equates to R1.4 billion. In addition, in September last year, Standard Bank took the decision to recognise a $163 million impairment of its stake in ICBCS, equal to R2.4 billion. In effect, one client cost Standard Bank and its shareholders billions. However, management said it had several meetings with the ICBC Standard holding company, that resulted in operational changes and better prospects going forward. Overall, Standard Bank seems less than optimistic about 2020, quoting several uncertainties. It says that global economic growth is expected to remain subdued and downside risks persist. Management mentions the impact of the Covid-19 outbreak, a rise in geopolitical and social unrest and further weather-related disasters. Of concern is the slowdown in Chinese imports of African commodities, as well as continued electricity disruptions in SA and continued low confidence. Standard Bank predicts economic growth of only 0.4% for SA in 2020, by far not enough to create new employment opportunities or to create new clients applying for loans to buy cars and other niceties. The markets seem to be just as uncertain. Headline earnings of R17.67 per share puts the company’s price/earning ratio at 8.7 times, at the current share price of R153. Current uncertainty among investors can be seen by the high volatility in the share price. In mid-February, the share was at R168, dropping to R148 within a week before recovering to current levels. Read: The full analysis of financial results for the year ended December 31 2019 This article was sponsored by Standard Bank