Old Mutual’s interim results tell the story of results from companies around the globe – that the outbreak of Covid-19 impacted the business operations and profitability severely. CEO Iain Williamson describes the six months under review as the most challenging since the 2008 financial crisis. Old Mutual opted to try to quantify the effect of the pandemic on its results and disclosed expenses of nearly R2.8 billion as “identifiable Covid-19 items” in its income statement, reducing its pre-tax earnings from operations to R1.54 billion in the six months to June compared to R4.5 billion in the comparative half year of 2019. The pandemic affected other figures in the income statement too. Income based on investment returns declined 36% due to difficult market conditions, with Williamson saying that returns from equities, property and bonds were all affected by the global impact of the pandemic. Income from associates – mainly Nedbank – fell by 75% to push headline earnings to R1.7 billion compared to R5.2 billion in the first half of 2019. This translates to headline earnings per share of 96.3 cents (128.1 cents in 2019). However, the basic earnings figures are bound to attract attention, showing a loss of more than 128c per share. The difference between earnings and headline earnings is largely due to a revaluation of Nedbank, with Old Mutual writing its investment of some 24% in Nedbank down by nearly R8.7 billion. Group financial director Casper Troskie explains that the valuation is based on the present value of future dividends from Nedbank. It is interesting that the adjustment just about mirrors how the market revalued Nedbank as measured by its market capitalisation, which dropped by more than 50% since January. New business activity down Management noted that new business volumes were significantly lower in the first half of the financial year compared to the prior year due to the long lockdown and restrictions placed on businesses and individuals. “Many of our advisors were unable to sell products during the lockdown period due to the partial closure of our branch network and lack of access to customers’ homes, places of work and branches. This led to a significant decline in sales of life policies and slowed loan disbursements.” Williamson adds: “Even now that activity has increased as branches reopened, restrictions remain in place and business volumes are still far below normal.” Warnings Management warned that the full impact of lower sales in the first six months will only be seen in the second half year as policy sales numbers are based on confirmed sales; the numbers will only reflect when new clients have started paying premiums. Interestingly, the results announcement included a trading statement to warn shareholders that earnings for the full financial year to December are likely to be more than 20% lower than the previous year. Management has promised to publish a further update as soon as there is more certainty on the expected decrease in earnings and earnings per share. That Old Mutual’s customers experienced financial strain during the challenging economic environment was evident by people missing premiums on their policies and disruptions in loan repayments (as Old Mutual associate Nedbank reported last week). Looking at opportunities Despite the severe crisis – Williamson noted that eight employees passed away from Covid-19 – one got the distinct idea from the webcast that he chose to focus on the positive. Williamson says the unusual circumstances certainly tested Old Mutual’s long-term strategy, and that its strategic focus could “cope well” with the crisis. “The group is well positioned not only to recover, but also to accelerate growth going forward,” Williamson told shareholders, analysts, employees and clients who opted to listen to the presentation of the results for the six months to June. “Our business remains robust, with sufficient levels of liquidity and strong solvency positions in our subsidiaries,” noted Williamson. “We have performed stress tests to assess our liquidity and solvency position under various recovery scenarios. Our liquidity levels remain positive and our solvency ratio remains within our target range in all the scenarios.” He also indicated that there are signs that the pandemic is passing, with claims against funeral policies showing a decrease since a peak in April. He, however, cautioned that it might not be the case. “Let’s hope so,” he said. Old Mutual considered what the new normal will look like and is adapting, with both Williamson and Troskie remarking that business is unlikely to return to levels considered normal in the past. The pandemic has accelerated digitalisation, which management referred to as the “new office”. “It opens new opportunities to service and reward customers and new opportunities for productivity gains,” says Williamson. Old Mutual took steps that enabled 23 000 of its employees to work from home. The new office will probably mean a home office for a lot of these employees. He says Old Mutual is looking at cutting costs by R750 million by the end of 2020, but that the cost savings can stretch to R1 billion. Cost savings will come from not filling vacancies, deferring salary increases, making operations simpler, and digitalisation, while business is expected to recover. “Advisor productivity has recovered from significantly low levels experienced during the second quarter, but remains muted compared to prior years. We expect productivity to improve during the second half of the year as the economy reopens and restrictions ease further,” said Williamson. All this is happening during a very interesting period in Old Mutual’s history. The 75-year old Old Mutual restructured its operations to its present form only two years ago and Williamson was appointed CEO only recently. Market commentators noted that the share price looked inexpensive at below R20 in January, before the whole world started to resemble a pear. Few will offer an opinion now, but it is remarkable that after the Old Mutual webcast the share extended its earlier gains to end the day more than 8% higher at R12.10 – compared to the JSE firming just 1%.