 NOMPU SIZIBA: TransUnion released its second-quarter findings on its South Africa Industry Insights Report. This period reflects the hard lockdown period in the country between the months of April and June, and looks at how the pandemic impacted the consumer credit market. Now it’s been revealed that 2.2 million jobs were lost in the period. This suggests that the credit market may have been hurt to an extent, depending on the proportion of those people with credit who lost their jobs. Well, to give us some insights into the report, I’m joined on the line by Carmen Williams. She’s the director for research and consulting at TransUnion South Africa. Thank you so much, Carmen, for joining us. One of your key findings was that outstanding credit balances grew on an annual basis. And, of course, this was a period when many of the financial houses were assisting consumers with things like payment holidays. CARMEN WILLIAMS: That’s correct. And that’s actually one of the drivers to this increase in overall outstanding debt balances that consumers have. What we’ve seen is that the uptake of payment holidays has increased substantially as consumers look for relief. Just for some context, vehicles, we saw about 152 000 payment-holiday applications come through on a monthly basis. Now this went up to 2.1 million in May and in June it was 1.3 million. So you can see that there has been a lot of uptake, and this is certainly one of the drivers. The way it works, Nompu, is that while your loan gets put on hold in terms of the repayment, the interest still accrues and that increases the overall balance. Another reason why balances have increased is that we’ve also noticed increased credit usage. Consumers are using the credit that’s available to them more than they did the year before. NOMPU SIZIBA: You also note that, despite the lower interest-rate environment, demand for new credit actually declined. Perhaps people are concerned about committing to loans because of the precarious environment that we’re in – or is it a case of banks also becoming more risk-averse? CARMEN WILLIAMS: What we’ve looked at, this quarter specifically, is to determine the demand in enquiries. That is, consumers who make applications for new credit. When we look, that’s completely consumer-driven. So when we looked at enquiries, we did see some massive changes when we compared that to last year this time, specifically for unsecured lending. For example, credit-card enquiries decreased by 62% compared to last year. Bank personal loans declined by 47%, and non-bank personal loans by 39%. Now this drop in enquiries is certainly symptomatic of the fall that we’ve seen in consumer confidence in the short term. And this is really, as you mentioned, I think from the difficult conditions faced because of the pandemic, and also job security. Consumers are not necessarily sure that they will have jobs going forward. And also they are concerned about their ability to take on new debt and then to service that in the near future. NOMPU SIZIBA: Of course, one of the winners, of course, was home-loan originations. They were up 8%, according to your report, which backs up what a number of property guys we’ve been speaking to on this platform have been saying – that indeed there’s been an uptick in parts of the property market. CARMEN WILLIAMS: Yes, absolutely. And this is also driven by two factors. Firstly, with interest rates being at an all-time low it’s more affordable for consumers to enter the property market. And, secondly, there was certainly a pent-up demand which stemmed from the hard lockdown that we experienced for a few months. The deeds office was closed for several months, which added to that pent-up demand. And, since it opened on June 1, we’ve seen that constraint ease somewhat. NOMPU SIZIBA: Of course we learned today from Stats SA that 2.2 million jobs were lost in the second quarter. This is significant. And you know, of course, it means that potential clients for the credit market will have declined. Part of that number could represent a substantial loss for lenders because people are not able to honour their debts because they no longer have a job. CARMEN WILLIAMS: Certainly true. And we’ve also seen that from the increasing delinquencies across most of the consumer credit products. For example, home-loan delinquencies actually more than doubled compared to last year. And that is really substantial. So you make a very valid point. We are already seeing these delinquencies increase with job losses and we can expect this to increase even more. NOMPU SIZIBA: Carmen, you guys use a lot of kind of technical language. Just give us the definition of “delinquency”. CARMEN WILLIAMS: I apologise for that. When we say delinquencies, we mean serious-level delinquencies, which refer to payments that have been missed for three consecutive months. NOMPU SIZIBA: Okay. So the effects of the Covid crisis are unlikely to suddenly turn around, with long-term socio-economic pain the most likely outcome for quite some time. Do you see credit providers doing things differently, perhaps becoming more risk-averse? What sort of trends do you see coming out of the damage that’s been caused by the pandemic? CARMEN WILLIAMS: It’s really difficult to say, because each credit provider has their own risk appetite within which they operate. So what we are seeing is originations increasing – barring the fact that we do report one quarter behind to account for a reporting lag, we do see that those originations have increased. At the same time, like I mentioned, we are seeing those enquiries that have dropped. So I think that credit providers are doing their bit by making relief programmes available to consumers. And I think some have worked out just in terms of how open the market will be going forward, given the circumstances. NOMPU SIZIBA: Carmen, one last thing. To the point that you make about the support that the financial sector has been giving clients, of course you’re focused on the second quarter. But, beyond that, because initially we were told that this kind of support – the payment holidays and so forth – would be for three months, have we seen a number of financial institutions extend that, and to what period have they extended it? CARMEN WILLIAMS: Yes, we have seen a number extend that. Credit providers are indeed understanding of the plight that consumers are going into. They do look at each individual in their own right, understanding a consumer’s full holistic responsibilities, as well as their credit profile, and they make decisions based on that. So a blanket statement across the board is not one that can be applied in this particular circumstance, as everybody’s circumstances are different. NOMPU SIZIBA: That was Carmen Williams. She’s the director for research and consulting at TransUnion South Africa.