US stock futures rallied after four weeks of declines and European shares added the most in three weeks as banks rebounded. The dollar weakened. Contracts on the S&P 500 Index were up more than 1% as investors found buying opportunities after a selloff that took the gauge to its lowest since July last week. Uber Technologies Inc. climbed in early trading after a judge ruled that the ride-hailing app can operate in London. HSBC Holdings Plc added 9% in London after its biggest shareholder raised its stake in a bet the embattled lender will return to paying dividends. Treasuries and German bonds slipped as investors cut back on haven assets. The pound strengthened on hopes that UK and European Union officials will make progress as a key week of Brexit talks begins. “It is hard to become too bearish,” said Mark Dowding, the chief investment officer at BlueBay Asset Management. “As we look into 2021, growth should be stronger, policy will stay supportive with further fiscal spending. A vaccine is also expected to be deployed and life to return closer to normal by the middle of next year.”  Stronger economic data from China also lifted investor sentiment. Data over the weekend showed profits at Chinese industrial companies grew for a fourth consecutive month in August. The advance in the Europe Stoxx 600 Index was broad, a sign that optimism is returning after last week, when the equity benchmark fell the most since June. ArcelorMittal SA gained as Cleveland-Cliffs Inc. agreed to buy its US operations. Carmarkers climbed following comments from Nissan Motor Co. that the company expects to return to profitability in 2021. Diageo Plc rose after saying it expects business to improve as bars and restaurants reopen. Still, global equities remain on course for the first month of losses since March after investors sold overheated technology stocks and fears about a resurgence in the virus weighed on airlines and retailers. “September certainly continued to challenge the intestinal fortitude of the bulls, but charting the S&P 500 from March shows the bull market remains very much intact,” said Chris Larkin, managing director of trading and investment product at E*Trade Financial Corp. In emerging markets, the Turkish lira and Russian ruble weakened as fighting between Armenia and Azerbaijan curbed appetite for the currencies of their bigger neighbours. Here are some key events coming up: These are the main moves in markets: