Whenever this ANC government announces an initiative, it’s quickly followed by incredulity. Not without good reason is the scepticism, provoked by long experience of promises designed to deceive or policies destined to fail. Why should this time of Covid-19 be any different? It’s because potentially – the key word being ‘potentially’ – choices are confined by the anticipation of bankruptcy. As previously in SA, when the fiscus was blown, economic sovereignty and political fantasy become subservient to bond markets. In 1989, the sanctions-induced deprivation of foreign exchange significantly tipped the SA government of FW de Klerk to commence the abandonment of apartheid. Right-wingers in the ruling party were defied. Urgency Slightly over three decades later, as a consequence of the junk downgrades induced by a decade of endemic corruption, the urgency to attract foreign exchange has forced the SA government of Cyril Ramaphosa into contracting with the markets-orientated International Monetary Fund (IMF). Left-wingers in the ruling party, of statist inclination, had better be defied. If they aren’t, causing Ramaphosa to stagger and stumble under their weight, the populist consequences are eerily predictable: raids on peoples savings, tax increases that stimulate capital flight, exacerbated rand weakness and overworked Reserve Bank printing presses … Such is the uncertainty that it’s guesswork whether the post-March clawback in JSE share prices foretells an imminence of recovery or an inevitability of inflation. The weaponisation of clichés could soon be over … In the same way that February 1989 sparked an ideological shift of seismic reverberation, so too can the IMF sign-up in July 2020 do much the same to time-worn clichés that masquerade as weapons to attack poverty, unemployment and inequality. There are positives, mainly in Finance Minister Tito Mboweni and Reserve Bank Governor Lesetja Kganyago – respectively representing National Treasury and the independent central bank – being the curators of orthodox fiscal and monetary policies. They’re informed by prudence, not grandstanding. Their sobrieties are consistent with IMF principles of marketplace deregulation and competition, the precise antithesis of central command that continues to find favour in the ruling party. That much is illustrated by power-drunk dictates of the national coronavirus command council. Its contradictory extremes are hostile to business, with which government wants a social compact. They also diminish the tax base on which government relies, frighten the capital investment that government urges, and obliterate jobs capable of retention. IMF loan The $4.3 billion IMF loan, at nominal interest and minimal conditionality, is an act of generosity to help SA through its most immediate Covid-19 setbacks. How it is disbursed will be watched before the next tranche, much bigger and more onerous, is inevitably requested within the next few years to assist SA through its foreseeable balance-of-payments quandaries. Until then, Mboweni is fortified in his budget promises. He will be monitored for implementation of expenditure ceilings, and on whether he succumbs to life support for decrepit state-owned enterprises. The IMF, unlike VBS Mutual Bank, with which certain politicians are more familiar, prefers an environment that will allow for repayment of its loans. What the IMF tells SA … Deep reforms are needed in product markets to remove barriers to domestic and foreign investment, followed by reforms to support jobs-rich growth. SA firms need to innovate, move to greener technologies, raise productivity, and seek out export markets. We intend to encourage firm entry to improve competition, leverage public-private partnerships in a fiscally-responsible way to boost market access, and reduce regulatory obstacles to investment in all sectors. We intend to raise employment creation by revamping the skills framework, giving firms greater ability to hire labour and undertaking education reforms to make it easier for first-time workers to find a job. What SA tells the IMF … We intend to take measures that include further reductions in the wage-to-GDP ratio, rationalisation of transfers to state-owned enterprises, and streamlining of subsidies. The reform package seeks to place expenditure levels on a more sustainable footing while improving its composition. On the revenue side, we intend to help revenue recover by strengthening enforcement to enhance tax compliance … Moreover, our support to state-owned enterprises is to be strictly conditional on meeting key performance indicators to improve their operational and financial health so as to reduce its need over time. What does this have to do with pension funds? Pretty much everything, because they’re targeted money pots for the surge in new infrastructure projects intended to trigger economic recovery. It makes conceptual sense. The long-term nature of pension-fund liabilities corresponds to the long-term nature of infrastructure returns, and there are loads of assets in pension funds misdirected from support for SA’s real economy. But neat theory bangs against tough reality: The litany of woe deepens for the millions of unemployed who rely entirely on social grants, which cannot be indefinitely extended, to save them from starvation. It’s economic recovery or bust. Two modest suggestions for Ramaphosa One is to declare his position on prescribed assets so that it’s clear whether portions of pension-fund assets are at risk of expropriation without compensation. Another is to crack down, really crack down without favouritism, on the corruption brazenly out of control. SA has never previously been as desperate for investment, both domestic and foreign. There’s plenty of it, potentially, provided that SA is seen as a safe destination financially and physically. An inert Ramaphosa has done little to make it so. The IMF support has arrived in time to light a fire under his feet. This article was published with the permission of Today’s Trustee, the original publication can be viewed here.