Besides red flags such as payments to deceased people, duplicate payments and overpayments in the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) Covid-19 Ters benefit scheme, Auditor General (AG) Kimi Makwetu also flagged government officials applying and benefitting from the scheme, in the agency’s Covid-19 Relief Funds Audit. Makwetu released the initial audit report on Wednesday, which had some damning findings against the UIF and South African Social Security Agency (Sassa), in addition to the government’s other Covid-19 reprioritised spending initiatives. Read: R500bn Covid-19 relief package exposed to fraud Makwetu noted that government officials were also tapping into Sassa’s special R350 Covid-19 social relief grant, which is aimed at the poorest people in distress. The AG, however, did not reveal actual numbers of such cases in the UIF and Sassa schemes, nor the values linked to this. Following the release of the report, Labour Minister Thulas Nxesi announced on Wednesday the suspension of senior UIF executives, including the organisation’s commissioner Teboho Maruping; CFO, Vuya Mafata; COO Judith Kumbi; and, head of supply chain management, Maria Ramoshaba. Nxesi said the report had highlighted “serious risks and violations” at the UIF under Maruping’s watch, hence the move to suspend him together with other senior executives. On the request of President Cyril Ramaphosa, Makwetu’s office said that it has undertaken “a real-time audit of 16 of the key Covid-19 initiatives introduced by government, which involved the management of R147.4 billion of funds made available for these initiatives.” This is part of the government’s broader R500 billion Covid-19 relief and economic stimulus package. Makwetu said the Covid-19 Relief Funds Audit represents the first in a series of reports that will deal with the financial management of the government’s Covid-19 initiatives, covering R68.9 billion (47%) of the R147.4 billion spending. The report covers the period until July 31, 2020. Of the R68.9 billion in spending covered in the initial report, the large majority of this (around R57 billion) relates to disbursements made as part of the UIF Ters scheme and Sassa social grants payments. “The Ters benefit, the social distress grant and the top-up of existing social grants were introduced to provide economic relief to the vulnerable and assist employers to protect jobs,” Makwetu noted in a statement. “By July 31, the UIF had paid just over R37 billion in Ters benefits and Sassa had paid R19.6 billion in social grants.” Makwetu said that the UIF and Sassa had to make significant changes in their processes and systems within a very short period to enable these pay-outs, without ensuring that good preventative controls were in place. “All of this increased the risk of payments to beneficiaries that are not eligible, overpayments, underpayments, the invalid rejection of beneficiaries, fraud and double-dipping.” “The lack of validation, integration and sharing of data across government platforms resulted in people – including government officials – receiving benefits and grants they were not entitled to,” Makwetu pointed out. “Some applicants could have been unfairly rejected as a result of outdated information on which assessment for eligibility was based,” he added. Listed below are the AG’s key findings on the payment of UIF Ters benefits: Makwetu said that the UIF is implementing actions to address some of the issues raised in the audit report. “We further selected payments to employers and bargaining councils to verify that the eligible beneficiaries were paid. The observations in this regard will be included in the next report,” he said. Listed below are the AG’s key findings on the payment of social grants: