Listed diversified property fund Emira provided R119 million in rental discounts and deferrals to more than 1 150 tenants in the year to June 2020 to help them survive the Covid-19 lockdown. Emira CEO Geoff Jennett said on Monday the fund was “the first out of the blocks” in terms of providing its tenants with rental relief but this was done while “ultimately knowing that we need to share the burden with our tenants because their sustainability talks to our ultimate sustainability”. Emira finance director Greg Booyens said they do see risk in collecting the rental deferrals and have therefore raised a specific bad debt provision of R20 million. These plus other items resulted in Emira’s distributable earnings declining by 15.2% to R670.9 million compared to the previous year, with the full year dividend dropping by 31% to 104.36 cents. Read: Listed property sector languishing 40% lower this year The decline in dividends was also attributed to only distributing cash-backed net profits that it received during the year, after making provision for additional cash reserves in its US investments. However, many of Emira’s JSE-listed property peers have decided against declaring a dividend because of the impact of the Covid-19 lockdown. Emira’s net asset value decreased 14.6% to R15.30 per share as a result of an increase in net derivative liabilities following decreased interest rates in both South Africa and the US, and a weaker rand. In addition, the fund decreased its portfolio value by 8.5% because of deteriorating macroeconomic conditions and the poor outlook. Below-average vacancies Emira chief operating officer and executive director operations Ulana van Biljoen said the total portfolio had a 4.1% vacancy rate despite the effect of Covid-19 and the slower take up of space because prospective tenants could not view vacant space during the lockdown and uncertainties about their future financial stability. She said office vacancies increased to 6.9% but are still far below the SA Property Owners Association (Sapoa) average of 12.3%. Urban retail vacancies increased to 3.8% but are once again lower than the Sapoa average of 4.8%, she said. Shares in Emira dropped 4.7% on Monday to close at R5.48. Emira benefitted from the strategic repositioning of the fund in 2018 that resulted in the reduction in its office portfolio from 35.7% to 25% of its total portfolio through the disposal of a R1.8  billion portfolio of 25 offices to Inani Property Holdings. However, Jennett stressed on Monday that Emira is not considering further reducing its office exposure. Van Biljoen added that it is too early to understand and make any decision based on how the Covid-19 lockdown will affect office space in the future. Jennett said the 25% of Emira’s total assets with exposure to the office market in South Africa is predominantly premium and A-grade space, with occupancies at 94%. “To trade out of any particular sector always takes time and given all the uncertainty in the market at the moment, I’m not convinced it’s opportune at this point in time to look to adjust the balance that we have. “At this particular stage, our office portfolio is performing relatively well and we will look to keep the balance as it is at the moment,” he said. Investment case Despite the uncertainty and challenging environment, Jennett highlighted the investment case for Emira. He said its share price is sitting “at a very low R5.60 to R5.70 level”, the fund has signalled in terms of its target for executives in terms of their key performance indicators a dividend in the current year of 119.7c, and the fund’s dividend policy has not changed. “The investment case for Emira, because it is diversified, is a strong one. There is no particular sector that is going to hurt us too much and if you can generate a return of 119.7 cents off an entry price of R5.60 to R5.70, that is a yield of over 20%. “This is a particular opportunity to take exposure through Emira and benefit from the recovery, notwithstanding that it is challenging at this point in time. But I think the metrics speak for themselves in terms of what that future could deliver,” he said. It appears likely that Emira will be quiet in terms of investments and acquisitions in the current year. Jennett admitted investing new capital in the current environment has its challenges because the gap between the seller and the buyer is even wider now because of the uncertainty caused by the pandemic. He said Emira will, from a South African perspective, look to maintain its position “unless there is an extraordinary opportunity that arises or an existing opportunity that we have already got that we can add to”. US exposure Jennett said the fund is “very comfortable” with its 12.5% asset exposure to the United States. “We are not looking to expand that position to any other jurisdiction but again, to the extent that there is a particularly attractive opportunity that arises in the US, we would look to bring in third party capital alongside us so that we can advantage of those sorts of opportunities and further diversify the stake that we have in the US,” he said. However, Jennett said it is unlikely that its asset exposure to the US will change materially in the next 12 to 24 months given the turbulence in the market. “In my mind, we have what we have on our Emira ship and we will continue to make the most of what we have. We are not necessarily going to be looking to expand and grow that further than what we have at this point in time,” he said. Emira’s total US portfolio comprises 10 grocery-anchored open-air convenience shopping centres valued at more than $493 million, with a 5.2% vacancy rate and 82.4% tenant retention rate.