The inter-ministerial committee on South African Airways (SAA) has reaffirmed government’s position that there is no more money available for the embattled airline. This at its meeting with unions on Tuesday. Instead, committee chair Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan as well as Labour Minister Thulas Nxesi and Tourism Minister Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane told the airline’s labour representatives that all stakeholders had to “commit to a creative solution for SAA to avoid a scenario where the business rescue is deemed to have failed”. Unions and the government delegation agreed that a “consultative forum will be established to advance dialogue and consultation on the process ahead”, the Department of Public Enterprises said in a statement. The parties also agreed to work together to ensure that a competitive and financially viable airline that is not dependent on the fiscus would emerge from the business rescue process. “Unions agreed that in arriving at a solution for SAA, some jobs will be lost, and that employees that remain behind will need to sacrifice some of the unaffordable arrangements that had worsened the airline’s financial position.” ‘Social plans’ for those retrenched The department said “social plans” would be created for workers who are going to lose their jobs. Read: Unions respond to SAA severance package offer The meeting with all eight trade unions recognised by SAA as well as representatives of the non-unionised employees comes after the airline’s business rescue practitioners (BRPs) Les Matuson and Siviwe Dongwana sent employees a draft proposal on severance packages for all staff. Matuson and Dongwana said given government’s refusal to sustain the business rescue process with an additional R10 billion in funding, it was unlikely the airline would be saved. Employees, who have also been meeting with the BRPs this week, have until Friday to accept the agreement that could see employee contracts terminated by April 30. After which, they would have to wait between six and 24 months to hear whether the airline will be able to pay their severance packages, in full or in part, from the sale of selected assets. Read: Cash-crunched SAA proposes termination of employee contracts On Monday Gordhan also presented a report on the airline to President Cyril Ramaphosa and his cabinet. A statement from cabinet gave no detail about the report or its future except to say that Gordhan should resubmit a consolidated report on the airline following the inter-ministerial committee’s meeting with organised labour this week. Both statements come ahead of Ramaphosa’s expected address to the nation where he will provide details on the additional economic and social relief measures that the government will put in place to respond to the Covid-19 pandemic.