 NOMPU SIZIBA: Inflation has risen at a slower pace. Data from Statistics South Africa showed that the Consumer Price Index in March rose by 4.1% on a year-on-year basis. That compares with an increase of 4.6% on the same basis in February. No doubt, limited economic activity, as a result of the disaster-management regulations released in the month to curb the spread of Covid-19 and the subsequent lockdown, had an effect. To unpack the data for us I’m joined on the line by Siobhan Redford, an economist at RMB. Thanks very much for joining us, Siobhan. I see that while inflation rose at a slower pace, the latest print was driven in part by education tuition fees. Just tell us more. SIOBHAN REDFORD: I must say that was quite a surprise. It was largely a higher increase in the primary and secondary education – I’ll have to double-check those figures. The thing is, overall education did well. Education had movement. It had movements down and movements up. It was at 6.7% for a very long time, and most of it has been based on pretty stable inflation for both primary and secondary and then tertiary education. The difference in this particular case is that we’ve seen some movement, which really did flow a little bit strangely. I’ll be honest, one of the reasons why I can’t completely kind of track on education is because it’s a relatively small and not often moving component of CPI. So obviously for those who have to pay …… it could be quite shocking …… When it comes to its influence on movement, education has very little impact on the change in ……. as we saw it. So the cost of primary and secondary education increased to over 7% – which is quite high, especially since it’s been increasing at above-inflation target levels for quite an extended period of time. Tertiary education has now fallen to below it, at 4.7%, which is again a …… NOMPU SIZIBA: Siobhan, what were your observations in terms of fuel and transportation costs? SIOBHAN REDFORD: This is where it gets really interesting. If you speak about how we might be seeing some of the impact of the pandemic – Covid-19 and lockdown – strangely enough, we are going to see a very limited impact in the print, one [thing] being because of fuel. The reason is that the fuel prices we were paying in March were based on February’s oil price. You have this over- and under-recovery tracking that happens from month to month. Basically whatever you over-recover or under-recover you are paying back into the kitty, or you are receiving back, in the fuel price. So we’re actually looking at the impact of a slight increase in the price of Brent crude oil, about $10/barrel over February, as a result of a decline in demand, specifically from China because they had their Chinese new year, which they then extended due to Covid-19. NOMPU SIZIBA: Yes. SIOBHAN REDFORD: All I can say it’s actually going to be even more dramatic in forthcoming months, because we are only going to see the oil price war effect in the your fuel prices in the April print. NOMPU SIZIBA: What about food inflation? Any signs of a pickup there, particularly because just before we went into lockdown there was some panic buying, and we understand that some retailers were taking advantage and upping prices. SIOBHAN REDFORD: I have seen a little information here and there, and I really should investigate a bit further. The problem is a lot of that kind of information is anecdotal. What the print shows us, though, is that food inflation was relatively stable. It went up to 4.4% year on year, just 0.2 percentage point higher than the previous month. So it’s not a dramatic move. And what’s underlying those dynamics is a lot of mixed movement. So we saw bread and cereals’ inflation actually falling to 3.8%, which is substantially below the middle of the inflation target. This is driven by the incredibly good harvest which is currently being expected this year in South Africa. That means that your maize prices are going to be lower. We are looking at [from] the last crop estimates about a 28% increase in your summer crops. So that’s going to push your prices down. Meat and fish, on the other hand, has increased and rose by 5%, which is probably one of its highest increases in a while. But we do believe that, while there is still space for it to increase, it’s going to be relatively muted going forward, given that demand is probably going to be quite weak. NOMPU SIZIBA: Yes. So, with the economy subdued, due to businesses being forced to shut down and consumers also being stuck at home, presumably we’re going to see a very tepid inflation trajectory until the economy is fully up and running again. SIOBHAN REDFORD: Absolutely. And there are many factors that are contributing to this, but we are going to still see the impacts, as I said earlier, of the decrease in the oil price, because of the oil price war and it remaining lower, and that based on very low demand. And it’s not even just domestic low demand, which is what has been the narrative …… South Africa last year, and we started seeing consumer confidence falling. This  has now become global, which means that demand for everything is quite low. NOMPU SIZIBA: The Reserve Bank has been like Superman wearing a cape in recent weeks, trying to inject liquidity in markets and placing a few rand back in the pockets of ordinary folk, and there does seem to be an expectation that they could do more in the future. What are your thoughts on this? SIOBHAN REDFORD: Well, there is definitely space for them do more. We are expecting that they will cut by another 50 basis points at least, and that is based on the fact that we think inflation is going to be even lower than the Reserve Bank currently expect. They’re expecting inflation to be 3.6%, and we’re expecting it to be 3.3%, which gives them space to cut a little bit more. Also the problem is – and this is really going to be tricky – even for the very well-seasoned forecast of the Reserve Bank, you are dealing with a lot of anecdotal …… and trying to understand what the full impact of this pandemic has been on the domestic and global economy. And so, the chances of the forecast changing as a result of policy reacting is quite high. So for me it’s going to be a case of we are going to see one more cut, not quite as big as we have seen already. And then probably a little bit of a wait-and-see approach, to see what happens. Are we going to see this this thing ….. global recovery or not? Are we going to see further waves of lockdowns globally, and further peaks of Covid-19? That could keep everything lower for longer. Also it’s going to depend on the data. A really good example right now is something like CPI. Its data is collected in the first three weeks of the month, which is why we know why the March print is quite reflective of what was available. But the whole of April has been lockdown, and that means that the data collectors haven’t been able to go out and get the information that they normally do. To complicate these matters even further, a number of services and goods haven’t even been available for sale, which means that even though they have high …… and they will be counted in the CPI, they haven’t actually been on sale. So Stas SA now are facing a situation where they’re going to have to think how to deal with those prices which they haven’t been able to get, but still keep them in the basket – and then how to deal with those prices they have been able to get by different means compared to normal. I think we are going to see a lot more of that kind of stuff happening with our statistics. Our GDP we know is going to be different, and they’ve already pushed out the release to the end of June almost a month later than originally planned. So it’s going to be data availability now that is going to be a challenge. NOMPU SIZIBA: Absolutely. This Covid-19 is messing everybody up. Thank you very much, Siobhan, for your time.