Whether emerging markets extend last week’s across-the-board gains will probably depend on what the so-called guardians of the global economy do to save them from the worst of the coronavirus. But even if the International Monetary Fund and Group of 20 offer help this week to address what former IMF chief economist Maury Obstfeld described as the greatest global crisis of the postwar period, the risks to the rally are manifold. Traders are bracing for one of the worst first-quarter earnings seasons in living memory as well as data showing a slump in Chinese economic output. “While we expect a recovery of flows to emerging markets in the second half of 2020, we do not believe that the pickup will be strong enough to bring about a return to 2019 levels,” economists at the Washington-based Institute of International Finance, including Robin Brooks and Elina Ribakova, wrote in a note. “We expect many countries to turn to multilateral support in coming months due to external financing stress and a lack of policy space to support their economies.” Ethiopia’s Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed, last year’s Nobel Peace Prize winner, said in a Bloomberg Opinion piece that Africa needs emergency fiscal stimulus worth $100 billion, in addition to the IMF’s already planned $50 billion of regular support, to tackle the Covid-19 crisis. The OPEC+ grouping of major oil producers agreed to almost 10 million barrels a day of supply cuts on Sunday. Brent crude rose on Monday, and the deal reduces the risk of prices extending their decline of about 55% this year. Emerging-market stocks and local-currency bonds had their best weekly performance in four years in the five days through Friday, while developing-nation currencies had their biggest weekly gain since June. The US Federal Reserve helped by announcing an extra $2.3 trillion of liquidity on Thursday. Still, the prospect of debt defaults, unsustainable stimulus efforts and unbridled infection rates in the world’s most vulnerable economies has left many investors on the sidelines. Emerging-market equity funds recorded net outflows for an eighth consecutive week in early April, according to EPFR Global. Another rate cut China’s GDP, trade data Debt discussions © 2020 Bloomberg