Many companies have had to change their business operations during the lockdown period. We caught up with several top executives to find out how they’re holding up, and whether or not it’s ‘business as usual’. Here’s what IBM SA general manager Hamilton Ratshefola says. Where are you working from? I’m working from home. How are you conducting your meetings? I’m using productivity tools such as Webex, Slack and Box to have my meetings. How are you finding working away from your usual designated work stations? In the first two weeks, I was struggling to find a rhythm and use tool sets optimally, but since the second week of April, I have mastered the tools and found my rhythm. I find that I really enjoy working from home and consider myself even more productive in this environment. Is the lockdown causing huge disruptions in your business operations? Our operations are able to function as services and can be delivered digitally. We’ve empowered our staff to work remotely and have made sure they are productive and engaged. We’ve been doing this for some time and the automation, digitisation and support we provide clients is adopted internally. With some clients, we cannot deliver because their operations are shut, but in general the operations of the business are operating and we are delivering essential services to clients. Our technical teams are working and delivering services, with the right personal protective equipment (PPE). What form of transformation would you say your company needs to implement in order to keep up with the changing times? As an organisation, we had looked at ways to keep our clients moving forward during Covid-19 and put ways of working in place that allowed us to respond rapidly and around the clock to any client needs that would come up. We had already adopted a work from home strategy and this current environment has helped us really realise the benefit of that strategy, which is finding new ways of working and providing a workforce with productivity tools that allow them to remain connected and productive no matter the external circumstance. At the heart of this strategy is Cisco Webex for meetings, presentations and sharing, Slack for collaboration and teamwork, and Box for document management. These tools have revolutionised the way we work and collaborate during this lockdown. After lockdown are you bound to see yourself doing things differently? I don’t think much will change in terms of my routine with regards to entertainment and shopping. What do crave the most? My favourite restaurants. I miss some good food. What do you indulge in most while working from home? Food – there is too much snacking happening at the moment. Is there a particular song, series or book that is keeping you busy during this time? My big indulgence is Netflix during this time.