The Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) is responsible for rolling out the Covid-19 regulations in South Africa. As a result, it now has a high profile. How appalling then, that the Auditor-General (AG) issued a disclaimer of audit opinion on the annual financial statements for the financial year ended March 31, 2019 as he was unable to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence to provide a basis for an audit opinion. The audit report details a shocking lack of internal controls, non-compliance with legislation, and hundreds of millions of rands lost – including through payments made to wrong suppliers, ghosts, and non-qualifying government employees. The general poor governance and lack of leadership makes a mockery of Cogta’s vision to be “a functional and developmental local government system that delivers on its constitutional and legislative mandates within a system of cooperative governance”. Expenditure Other matters Report on the audit of the annual performance report The AG is required to report material findings on the reported performance information against predetermined objectives for selected programmes presented in the annual performance report. The AG selected regional and urban development and legislative support, institutional development, and the CWP, and found that there was a lack of audit evidence to support the reported achievement. Material findings on compliance Significant internal control deficiencies Material irregularities identified during the audit The lack of effective internal controls for the approval and processing of payments will result in material irrecoverable losses: A municipal infrastructure grant of R183.5 million was paid to the wrong recipient. An amount of R104 million remains irrecoverable! The matter has been reported to the Special Commercial Crimes Unit of the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (the Hawks) and the Special Investigations Unit for further investigation. A total of R401.7 million (2018: R287.8 million) was paid to consultants, and a total of R2.6 billion (2018: R2.4 billion) was paid to contractors. The total expenditure for the year amounted to R81.9 billion (2018: R76.4 billion). With the lack of internal controls, poor governance, and illicit payments – to ghosts, to wrong suppliers and for goods not received – exactly how much has funded corruption? How many people, living in abject poverty, have passed away due to the lack of funds? Cogta has a lot to answer for. Its lack of governance and disregard for the poor should not be swept away by the Covid-19 tide. The spirit of Batho Pele (‘People First’) has dissipated.