Many companies have had to change their business operations during the lockdown period. We caught up with several CEOs to find out how they’re holding up, and whether or not it’s ‘business as usual’. Here’s what MTN CEO Rob Shuter says. Where are you working from? I am currently working from my home office and will continue to do so until the situation improves and we get some guidance from the authorities on the next steps. How are you conducting your meetings? I’m using an array of online tools such as Skype for Business, Yammer, Microsoft Teams, Zoom and BlueJeans. I also use Ayoba for instant messaging and news updates on the coronavirus. How are you finding working away from your usual designated work stations? I am generally on the road most of the time so am quite used to working remotely. MTN has invested a lot in remote working technologies and we are continuing business as normal. Our customers, communities, employees and other stakeholders are our main priority so we’re focusing on keeping the connectivity lights on to ensure everyone enjoys the benefits of modern, connected life during these times. Is the lockdown causing a huge disruption in your business operations? No, our operations have not been greatly affected although closing the stores in South Africa has created some complexity. It’s important that we ensure the reliability and sustainability of our network during this pandemic. Furthermore, we have developed robust products and services to assist our customers. Going forward, what type of transformations would you say your company needs to implement in order to keep up with the changing times? We need to continue to invest in our networks and technologies so we can bring more and more people into the modern digital world – both by connecting them to the power of the internet but also to the economy through our mobile money offerings. In our business, we need to accelerate our efforts to digitalise much more of our processes and channels. These will also help a lot in the current circumstances when all activities are moving from the physical to the digital world. What do you miss the most? I miss not interacting with my colleagues in the office and in the markets. I also miss being able to move around freely as and when I choose. But against that it is nice to be at home with my family for a change and I do not miss aeroplanes, airports or hotels at all. Which restaurant/s are you looking forward to going to after the lockdown, and what will you order? My favourite restaurant is Franco’s in Parkview, and when I go I will give Franco a big hug and then order the carpaccio. Read: Keeping up with the CEOs amid Covid-19: Naspers SA head Keeping up with the CEOs amid Covid-19: Andrew Holden Keeping up with the CEOs amid Covid-19: Mike Brown