Italy will start easing lockdown restrictions next week and Germany reopened some schools on Monday as new cases and fatalities drop in Europe. In Britain, Prime Minister Boris Johnson returned to work and urged the public not to let up on social distancing measures. Russia reported more than 6,000 cases again as total infections surpassed China, where the outbreak first began. Globally, confirmed cases are now approaching 3 million. Stocks rallied in Asia and Europe and U.S. index futures rose as investors eyed measures to restart shuttered economies and after the Bank of Japan expanded stimulus measures. Key developments Hong Kong’s Department of Health confirmed the city had no new cases as of 4 p.m. on Monday. The city, which has 1,037 confirmed infections, has recorded zero virus cases for the second day in a row and for the fourth time in eight days. Earlier, the Sing Tao Daily reported that the government would consider relaxing mandatory quarantine control on mainland Chinese visitors, allowing civil servants to return to the office and easing restrictions on some business sectors, such as beauty parlours and gyms, should the number of new coronavirus cases continue to be low or remain at zero. Russia surpasses China in total cases Confirmed cases rose by 6,198 in the past day to 87,147, surpassing total confirmed infections in China, where the outbreak first began. The number of new cases is slightly lower than on Sunday, when 6,361 new diagnoses were registered. The death toll rose by 50 to 794. The pandemic should plateau in Russia by mid-May and the situation will become “easier” in June, Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told the Argumenty i Fakty newspaper earlier. Turkey eases restrictions in border crossings The country removed a 14-day quarantine rule for Turkish truck drivers coming in and out of the country. Foreign truck drivers will be able to enter Turkey unless they show any Covid-19 symptoms, but they will have to exit in 72 hours after offloading their goods. The easing doesn’t apply to trucks and their drivers using any of the border crossings with Iran or Iraq. Singapore cases top 14,000 The city-state reported 799 new cases on Monday, down from 931 on Sunday, taking the total number of infections to 14,423. Singapore — which has one of Asia’s smallest populations — is emerging with the region’s highest number of coronavirus cases, after China and India. Tokyo new cases lowest since March 30 Tokyo found 39 new cases of coronavirus on Monday, the second day in a row the figure was under 100 people, Fuji News Network reported without attribution. The number is also the lowest since 13 on March 30, though figures published Monday tend to be lower because of the weekend. Tokyo reported 72 new cases on Sunday and 103 on Saturday. Japan is weighing the need to extend the country’s state of emergency, balancing a fall in new coronavirus cases with fears that easing restrictions too soon might lead to the very explosion in infections authorities had sought to avoid. EU power use rises for first time since lockdown Electricity use in the European Union rose for the first time in eight weeks, indicating economic activity may be starting to increase as coronavirus infections and deaths decline. Italy and Germany last week showed signs that they’re beginning to consume more electricity, suggesting economic activity was starting to increase in some corners of Europe hardest hit by the pandemic. Germany’s cases rise the least this month The number of new coronavirus infections and fatalities in Germany rose by the slowest pace in a month, as the country took another step in easing restrictions with some schools reopening on Monday. A total of 157,770 people have been infected with the virus, an increase of 1,257 in the 24 hours through Monday morning, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. New infections held below 2,000 for a third day, and deaths rose by 99 to 5,976. Government officials continued to warn about moving too quickly in relaxing containment measures even as Bavaria, Hamburg and Berlin reopen schools for pupils taking state exams or graduating this year. Last week, the country relaxed some shop closures in its first step to ease the lockdown imposed more than a month ago. Thailand to extend state of emergency Thailand said it plans to extend its state of emergency to May 31 to cement progress in reducing infections. The emergency, which was due to expire at the end of April, is set to be extended by another month, Taweesilp Witsanuyotin, a spokesman for the Covid-19 center, said in a briefing. The government reported nine new coronavirus cases Monday, taking the total to 2,931. Officials were detecting more than 100 infections daily in late March and early April. Adidas forecasts loss, bayer faces challenges Adidas AG forecast a loss in the second quarter as revenue slumps because more than two-thirds of the German athletic wear maker’s stores are closed due to the Covid-19 pandemic. Bayer AG said it’s facing the potential for “considerable liquidity challenges” amid the pandemic as it tries to resolve the mountain of Roundup litigation in the U.S. Dubai eases restrictions on virus hotspots Dubai eased restrictions on two of the city’s coronavirus hotspots, densely populated areas that are home to the gold souk and museums. The Naif and Al Ras areas will return to normal between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m. and follow the 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. restrictions in place for the rest of the city, state-run WAM reported. More than 6,000 tests were conducted among residents in the areas, and no new coronavirus cases were found in the last two days. Bank of Japan ramps up stimulus The Bank of Japan scrapped a limitation on buying government bonds and ramped up its buying of corporate debt, in an effort to stop the coronavirus from destabilizing the financial system. The central bank also ramped up its scope for buying corporate bond and commercial paper by raising its ceiling on holdings to 20 trillion yen, according to its statement. The BOJ’s previous guideline on government debt was to increase holdings by around 80 trillion yen ($743 billion) per year. China industrial profits drop by more than a third Profits of Chinese industrial companies continued to fall as business activity struggled to recover from the aftermath of the coronavirus. Industrial profits dropped 34.9% from a year earlier in March, improving slightly from a 38.3% decline in the first two months of the year, the National Bureau of Statistics said. Trump calls Azar after reports cast him as imperilled President Donald Trump called Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar this weekend to say his job is safe after reports the White House may oust the health chief as the administration faces criticism over its coronavirus response. The call, described by a person familiar with the matter, and a Trump tweet on Sunday backing Azar came after multiple news accounts saying some officials within the White House had discussed his dismissal and potential replacements. Azar also weighed in on Twitter, praising Trump’s leadership and saying reports he’s about to be replaced are fake. Dismissing the nation’s top health official in the middle of a pandemic would amount to acknowledgment the U.S. response hasn’t been as good as Trump has portrayed it. China has three new cases, no deaths China reported three additional coronavirus cases and no deaths, according to a statement from the National Health Commission. The country hasn’t reported a fatality in 12 straight days, leaving the death toll at 4,633. It has a total of 82,830 confirmed cases. China reported 25 asymptomatic cases for April 26, including 1 from abroad. It has 974 such cases under medical observation. Australia launches contact-tracing app Australia launched mobile-phone software to help trace people infected with the coronavirus as parts of the country start to loosen restrictions on movement. The COVIDSafe app records digital handshakes between smartphones via Bluetooth, and if someone catches the virus, health authorities will be able to track who has been within 1.5 meters of the person for 15 minutes or more. More than 1.1 million people have signed up since its launch Sunday, the government said. HK, Taiwan consider easing some measures Hong Kong’s government would consider relaxing mandatory quarantine controls on mainland Chinese visitors, allowing civil servants to return to the office and easing restrictions on some business sectors, should the number of new cases continue to be low or remain at zero, Sing Tao Daily reported, citing unidentified people. Taiwan is also studying easing measures as it has had no local confirmed cases for 14 consecutive days, Taipei-based United Daily News reported, citing the island’s Centers for Disease Control. Beef shortages loom as plants close Plant shutdowns are leaving the U.S. dangerously close to meat shortages as coronavirus outbreaks spread to suppliers. Almost a third of U.S. pork capacity is down, the first big poultry plants closed on Friday and experts are warning that shortages are just weeks away. Brazil, the world’s No. 1 shipper of chicken and beef, saw its first major closure with the halt of a poultry plant owned by JBS SA, the world’s biggest meat company. Key operations are also down in Canada. © 2020 Bloomberg L.P.