The London High Court has ordered Ernst & Young (EY) to pay former EY Dubai audit partner Amjad Rihan $11 million compensation for loss of past and current earnings. The details are revealed in its judgment dated April 17, 2020. EY, one of the Big Four accounting firms, provides advisory, assurance, tax and transaction services globally. It operated under the name EY Dubai in the United Arab Emirates. In 2013, Rihan, the whistleblower, became aware of serious irregularities in the business operations of an audit client, Kaloti Jewellery International DMCC (Dubai Multi Commodities Centre). The irregularities raised the possibility of money laundering. Withstanding pressure from EY and the DMCC to sanitise his audit and compliance report of Kaloti, Rihan and his family felt compelled to temporarily leave Dubai for their own safety. When EY tried to coerce Rihan into returning to Dubai in 2014, he was forced to resign. He says that over the next few years he was blacklisted and unemployable. The court judgment is focused on whether Rihan was entitled to damages for negligence and conspiracy to injure and, if not, the damages he was entitled to – but the evidence led and the court’s findings are in my view a damning indictment of EY’s role in this matter. Read: Background Kaloti purchased and refined gold. The irregularities uncovered on the audit are briefly summarised below: Rihan conveyed information about the irregularities to the DMCC, which then put “improper pressure” on him and EY Dubai to airbrush the irregularities, thereby misleading readers of the reporting documents. Fearing for his and his family’s safety, Rihan located to the UK in 2013. Senior EY officials “developed proposals that amounted to acquiescence and collusion” with DMCC’s plan to protect Kaloti from an adverse audit finding. Rihan protested that this was unethical, amounted to professional misconduct, and should be reported to the London Bullion Market Association. When Rihan refused to sign assurance audit reports, EY replaced him with a more malleable accountant, who duly sanitised Rihan’s audit findings. EY’s name was thus lent to “a flagrantly misleading assurance reporting process”. EY tried to force Rihan to return to Dubai. He refused on the basis of security concerns. He had previously privately disclosed the irregularities to the international NGO Global Witness, which, when it was clear Rihan had to resign, publicly released Kaloti’s businesses practices. Getting ‘in’ by any means Testifying in court, Rihan recalled a meeting held in London in 2013 with Hervé Labaude, EY general counsel for the region, at which Labaude applied pressure on him to sign the sanitised audit documents. Labaude uttered a French quote, which translates as: “If we can’t get in through the door we get in through the window”. The court accepted this to mean that Labaude was accusing Rihan of preventing him from devising a means of avoiding disclosure of the real Kaloti audit findings. A brief summary of the findings The judgment includes a detailed analysis of how the court arrived at the total sum of damages payable to Rihan, finally determined at $10.8 million (R202 million) for loss of earnings and future loss of earnings, and £118 000 (R2.76 million) for medical and insurance cover. This appalling treatment of a whistleblower, the consequences for any future employment, the dire consequences on his health and the attempted cover up of criminal activity is yet another huge blot on the accounting fraternity. But do they care? EY includes the EY network, the EY organisation, Ernst & Young Global Limited, Ernst & Young Europe LLP, Ernst & Young (Emeia) Services Limited, and EYGS LLP. <a href="http://iono.fm/e/680590">Content hosted by iono.fm</a>