Who would have thought that two of the wealthiest retailers in South Africa would be the first to ‘go rogue’ on their rental obligations? Edcon, the perennial patient, was expected to alert its long-suffering landlords that its already considerably trimmed-back rental obligations were likely to be an early victim of the Covid-19 lockdown. But for H&M and The Foschini Group (TFG) to lead the field of non-payers of rent was unexpected. One analyst said the same logic will surely help to justify non-payment by the millions of credit customers of the big retailers. “The move opens up a Pandora’s box that could have long-term ramifications for the entire sector,” says Sasfin analyst Alec Abraham. One lawyer tells Moneyweb it will be very difficult for retailers to enforce payment by their credit customers before a judge if the retailers themselves have refused to pay their debts. Efforts, resistance While every non-grocery retailer will be feeling huge pain during the lockdown, many – such as Mr Price and Woolworths – have said they will be engaging with their landlords in an effort to come to an acceptable arrangement. Read: Retail landlord alliance reveals Covid-19 relief package for tenants The conciliatory position, reflecting the reality that blame cannot be allocated to either of the parties and that this is a battle everyone is facing, is in keeping with the grim mood of the lockdown, says the lawyer. But not all retailers are inclined to be conciliatory. H&M, which not only has a prominent position in South African malls but is one of the world’s wealthiest and most powerful clothing retailers, informed landlords across the globe that it won’t be paying rent for the duration of the lockdowns. It is a remarkable move by a company that had around €1 billion in cash/cash equivalents and short-term investments on its end-December 2018 balance sheet. Similarly, TFG has unilaterally decided it will not be paying any rent due at the end of April because of the lockdown. The retailer said it sought legal advice before deciding to suspend payment. “The decision was not taken lightly and has been guided by legal counsel,” says TFG head of property Brad Rothenburg. Sasfin’s Abraham describes the decision as “very, very irresponsible” and believes it will have a cascading impact throughout the retail chain. He believes that although trading has been difficult this year, most of the retailers, with the exception of Edcon, should be able to handle a few weeks of lockdown. There is certainly little sign of stress in TFG’s balance sheet, given that in the six months to end-September 2019 it generated free cash flow of R1.1 billion. Its debtors’ book at end-September was R7.5 billion. Financial 2019 (to end-March) wasn’t too bad for the group or its executives. CEO Anthony Thunström picked up a R13.4 million bonus on top of his R7 million guaranteed pay for that year. And while the plummeting share price – from R150 in January to a low of R65 at the time of the rent decision – has added to the tension, some have used it as a buying opportunity. Former CEO Doug Murray paid R6 million to add 60 000 shares to his portfolio in late March.  Pepkor has also said it will not be paying rent for the lockdown period and, like TFG, is relying on exemptions to the Competition Act gazetted by Trade and Industry Minister Ebrahim Patel on March 24. The exemptions allow competing landlords and tenants to work together to reduce rentals or permit rental holidays during the lockdown. The once-robust Pepkor has had a fairly torrid time since the implosion over two years ago of its controlling shareholder Steinhoff. The group generated about R7 billion cash in financial 2019 but is carrying a hefty debt burden.  In mid-March the top three Pepkor executives were awarded a combined R30.6 million of shares at zero cost. The shares will vest over three years.