South African Corporates are rallying to support the country’s 430 000 healthcare workers, who are at the forefront of battling the deadly Covid-19 virus. Insurance group Old Mutual is providing R4 billion in cover to healthcare workers during the crisis and the Valenture Institute, a global online high school launching a year-long scholarship programme for the children of healthcare workers. Under Old Mutual’s scheme, healthcare workers who are registered with the Healthcare Professionals Council of South Africa (HPCSA), as well as all registered practitioners of the South African Nursing Council (SANC), will be covered for R10 000. This will be in effect from April 1 2020 to December 1 2020, and will payable in the event of death of qualifying healthcare workers, and is intended to provide relief to their families. The cover has no exclusions, and will include death related to any cause and unlike traditional cover, this is neither a product nor a policy and no premiums will be recovered on it. Instead, the cover will be freely accessible to registered healthcare workers on the frontlines of the Covid-19 pandemic who are selflessly working to ensure the wellbeing of impacted South Africans everywhere, every day. Old Mutual interim CEO Iain Williamson said the decision to support healthcare workers was inspired by a collective call supported by its own 30 000-strong workforce. “We were compelled to respond to the immediate need by our employees and by our responsibility as the country’s leading insurer. We’re acutely aware of the critical work being done by all essential services workers across the country as they continue to serve, care and protect our nation during this crisis,” said Williamson. For its part, the Valenture Institute’s Healthcare Scholarship Program will be for high school students through its online education platform. It’s worth R60 000, depending on the number of subjects and duration. The programme will allow a learner to join the June 2020 intake, using a combination of technology, high-touch human support and social engagement. ‘Our country’s health care providers are on the frontline of this pandemic, and at Valenture Institute, we feel it’s our responsibility to support those who are selflessly supporting the rest of us.’, says Rob Paddock, CEO and Founder of Valenture Institute.