African central banks have joined the global wave of emergency meetings and unusual measures to cushion their economies against the impact of the coronavirus pandemic. While many of the central banks in the region target inflation and have to prop up volatile currencies, they’ve also used non-traditional policy tools in addition to aggressively cutting interest rates to salvage economic growth and encourage more lending to consumers and businesses. Read: Sarb steps into the bond market Lockdowns have brought economic activity to a halt in many African countries, leaving deserted the streets of the commercial hubs of Lagos in Nigeria and Johannesburg in South Africa, suspending exports to try and maintain domestic food supplies and stopping travel. That means the impact of the coronavirus is transmitted to African economies much faster than during the global financial crisis, when they were largely affected through external channels, said Razia Khan, chief economist for Africa and the Middle East at Standard Chartered Bank. “The response has been proactive,” she said. “But the nature of the threat requires it to be so.” These are examples of the steps taken by some of the region’s central banks: Read: Zimbabwe restores dollar peg as currency crashes In countries such as South Africa, the burden of support has fallen on the central bank because the government lacks the fiscal space and resources to provide stimulus. Despite their efforts, central banks alone won’t be able to stimulate the regional economy out of a coronavirus crisis. It could take African economies up to three years to recover from the slowdown and the continent needs emergency stimulus of $100 billion, including debt-servicing waivers, according to the region’s finance ministers. “I suspect governments feel they can’t afford a bigger fiscal response unless they are given much needed support from the G7,” said Charlie Robertson, Renaissance Capital’s global chief economist. “The virus is a global threat so there are good, selfish reasons for the West to support African efforts to fund the suppression of the virus.” © 2020 Bloomberg