As with the 2020 Draft Disaster Management Tax Relief Bill, the Draft Disaster Management Tax Relief Administration Bill was published on April 1 for comment by April 15. Again, even though this is a bill and must still be promulgated, the proposals came into operation on April 1. Read: Decoding the Draft Disaster Management Tax Relief Bill Both bills contain the latest proposed amendments in regard to tax relief measures to soften the economic dampener caused by the Covid-19 pandemic. The amendments in this bill are also narrow, allowing deferments of provisional and interim tax payments for qualifying taxpayers that were registered with the South African Revenue Service (Sars) as at March 1. A qualifying taxpayer includes a tax-compliant company, trust, partnership or individual with turnover or gross income of R50 million or less in the year of assessment falling within the April 1, 2020 to April 1, 2021 period – and where the gross income amount does not include more than 10% of income in the form of interest, dividends, foreign dividends, property rental, or remuneration received from an employer. Deferral of employee tax Qualifying employers, either resident employer or representative employer, may pay just 80% of the employee tax (PAYE) due during this period. The remaining 20% must be included in the gross amount due by the employer in six equal monthly instalments, starting on September 7, 2020 and ending on February 5, 2021. This deferral will not attract interest or penalties. Deferral of provisional tax payments Ordinarily, provisional tax is payable in two six-monthly tranches of 50% each, based on the estimated amount of income generated in the first and second half of the tax year (less any PAYE tax deducted by an employer and the payment of any foreign taxes that qualify under Section 6quat of the Income Tax Act in each period). In terms of the permissible deferment, these may now be paid as follows: The deferred amount (the remaining 35% for the full year) must be paid at the time the third or ‘additional’ provisional tax payment is made. Deferral of micro business interim tax payments A micro business can be a company, a close corporation or an individual with a turnover of less than R1 million. A qualifying micro business may pay the tax due as follows: This deferral will not attract interest nor penalties. However, interest and penalties will apply in instances where, on assessment, Sars is of the opinion that a taxpayer did not qualify for relief under the proposed amendments. Please note that this article provides a brief summary of the proposed legislative amendments and does not constitute tax advice.