Energy regulator Nersa on Tuesday defended its decision to suspend its operations during the nationwide Covid-19 lockdown. In a statement it says it “has recently received concerns regarding delays in decision making, particularly related to the approval of licence and registration applications from independent power producers during the lockdown period”. It then defends the decision on the basis that public participation, as required by the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act (Paja) cannot be conducted during the lockdown. However, in Nersa’s initial announcement on March 26, acting chief human capital officer Sello Hlobelo stated that “all Nersa business originally scheduled to take place” from midnight on March 26 until midnight on April 16 “is put on hold, and cannot be carried out”. This indicates that all Nersa business, not only that dependent on public participation, has been suspended. The suspension of operations has in the meantime been extended to April 30, in line with President Cyril Ramaphosa’s announcement that the lockdown was extended by two weeks. Crucial decisions on ice The complete closure of Nersa has been met with surprise by Chris Yelland of EE Business Intelligence and other energy experts, in light of the crucial decisions Nersa has to deal with. These include: Public participation related to the Eskom RCA decision was completed in February and the announcement of Nersa’s decision was due on March 24 according to a timetable Nersa published earlier. Yelland says it is concerning that Nersa is totally closed for business. He points out that the electricity industry is being plagued by delays and that this will only exacerbate the situation. “There is no reason why they cannot do their work remotely, like many others are doing,” he says. CEO suspended In the meantime it has become known that Nersa CEO Chris Forlee was suspended on March 25, just before the lockdown started. Nersa chair Jacob Modise informed staff in a letter dated March 25 that Mantashe had placed Forlee on precautionary suspension earlier that day. The Department of Mineral Resources and Energy confirmed Forlee’s suspension, saying it “follows an investigation by the [Nersa] board into allegations of impropriety against Mr Forlee” and will continue until the completion of a disciplinary hearing. Forlee has not been furnished with any charges yet, and did not want to comment on the matter. According to Yelland however, the matter relates to efforts last year by “ambitious factions within Nersa to get Forlee out of the way on dubious charges”. A senior Nersa official who asked not to be named confirmed that Forlee was accused of awarding himself an unapproved salary increase and wrongly approving the registration of a number of rooftop solar projects. These charges were reportedly investigated at the time and nothing came of them, but they have now resurfaced. In 2017/18 Forlee was earning a basic salary of R1.912 million plus a performance bonus, which amounted to a total of R2.4 million, the Nersa annual report shows. In 2018/19 his basic salary increased to R1.937 million. The performance bonuses had not been finalised by the time the annual report was published and his total income, which includes other allowances, amounted to R2.2 million. Nersa received an unqualified audit report in 2018/19 and a clean audit for the fifth consecutive time in 2017/18. New full-time member for electricity Nersa also announced that Mantashe appointed Nhlanhla Gumede as full-time regulator member for electricity, starting April 1. This position has been vacant since 2017, when the term of well-respected member Thembani Bukula ended. Nomfundo Maseti, full-time member for piped gas, has been acting in the electricity position as well for the last two years. According to Yelland the second 12-month appointment was non-compliant with the Electricity Regulation Act. A Nersa press release states that Gumede is an experienced energy consultant and former chairperson of PetroSA. His term at PetroSA was however turbulent and the board in 2018 adopted a motion of no confidence in him. Several stakeholders expressed their concern over his lack of expertise, specifically with regard to electricity.