South Africa’s rand plunged to a one week-low while stocks sank by more than 2% on Monday as the outbreak of a deadly virus in China worsened, dimming demand for risk assets globally. At 1400 GMT the rand was 1.1% weaker at 14.55 per dollar, a touch better than a session-low of 14.58 that represented its weakest since January 20, with the selloff largely driven by investors dumping emerging-market assets. Read: Virus sell-off hits SA stocks hard on China exposure Assets fall as China virus fears grow, rand tumbles Fears around the potential economic damage of the coronavirus outbreak intensified as the death toll rose to 81, with investors fretting over the impact on travel, tourism and broader economic activity. The flight from risk and heightened volatility in currencies hit the rand harder than its emerging market peers, underlining impact of fragile economic outlook and possible downgrade to junk by Moody’s. “EM currencies are weaker in general, but the rand has been most negatively affected as concerns over SA’s debt projections raise fears of a Moody’s downgrade,” said chief economist at Investec Annabel Bishop in a note. Finance Minister Tito Mboweni gives his budget speech on February 26, with Moody’s, the last of the top three agencies to still rate the country at investment level, due to issue a credit review a week later. Bonds were also weaker, with the yield on the benchmark 2026 government issue up 4 basis points to 8.135%. Stocks were also thumped by the run on risk, with the Johannesburg Stock Exchange’s Top-40 index down 2.45% to 49,957 points and the broader all-share index sliding 2.35% to 55 917 points. Retailers, platinum miners and banks suffered in the broad based slide with only gold shares helping to limit the fall as the global price of bullion rose more than 1% as investors looked for safe-haven assets. Upmarket grocer and clothes seller Woolworths warned on Monday that half-year earnings could drop by as much as 20%, knocking shares more than 4%, partly due to weak sales over the critical December period when consumer spending on non-essentials normally jumps. Read: Woolworths hit by weak Australia, December results “The Woolies results show some pressure on clothing, but what stands out is the food division. It tells you a lot about the consumer and the economy,” said analyst at Unum Capital Lester Davids. Food sales increased by 8.1% compared to a 2.2% rise in fashion, beauty and home sales. “Look at Shoprite results a few weeks ago, that showed sharp revenue growth in the food section too. This tells you people are spending but only the things they really need. Consumers are cautious, they’re under a lot of pressure,” Davids said. Telecoms giant Naspers and logistics firm Bidvest were both down more than 3%, while in resources Anglo American Platinum slipped 4% followed by Impala Platinum, down 3.56% on the day.