The rapid spread of a deadly virus from China is top of emerging-market investors’ minds as they ponder its impact on the global economy. Concern the outbreak will develop into something akin to the SARS pandemic of 2003 halted a seven-week rally in emerging markets in the five days through Friday, and continued to weigh on currencies, stocks and bonds on Monday. With China’s markets closed for the Lunar New Year holidays, the nation’s assets abroad came under pressure. Read: Virus sell-off hits SA stocks hard on China exposure Negative debt pile surges by $1.2trn in dash for havens The offshore yuan slid to the weakest level this year and neared 7 per dollar, while a China-focused exchange-traded fund in Europe plunged about 8%, poised for its biggest decline since May. The death toll in China from the virus climbed to at least 80 and confirmed cases in the Asian nation jumped to more than 2 700. “The Wuhan coronavirus outbreak has the potential to whipsaw Chinese equities and, indeed, all global risk assets,” said Seema Shah, chief strategist at Principal Global Investors in London. “With valuations elevated, asset classes are already vulnerable to shifts in sentiment, and memories of the meaningful economic impact of SARS have the potential to play havoc with market confidence.” As traders weigh the impact of the virus on Chinese businesses and consumption, the non-manufacturing reading of the nation’s purchasing managers’ index may offer early signs of its effects on the service sector. The phase-one trade deal with the US this month, combined with recovering global demand, had improved the outlook for Chinese factories and exporters in 2020. China extended the Lunar New Year break until next Monday to help stem the spread of the virus. With holidays across Asia, trading flows may be below average. Some bulls aren’t wavering. The onshore yuan is unlikely to weaken beyond 7 per dollar when trading resumes because the outbreak will is likely to be contained over the next couple of weeks, said Mansoor Mohi-uddin, a Singapore-based senior macro strategist at NatWest Markets. The potential for further tariff reductions before the US elections in November may even drive the Chinese currency toward 6.65, he said. Morgan Stanley strategists, including James Lord, said they aren’t ready to call for an end to the emerging-market rally, citing improving global activity, supportive central-bank policy, strong inflows and valuations that don’t look too rich yet. Contagion fears aside, emerging-market investors will be watching interest-rate decisions in the US, Kenya, Angola, Hungary, Pakistan, Chile, Sri Lanka, Ukraine and Ghana this week. Ukraine seen easing Economic data and events © 2020 Bloomberg L.P.