It’s not just the US presidential election that will dominate the political calendar in 2020. A slew of emerging markets face their own votes as investors embrace politics-inspired turbulence. The first waymarker will be elections in Taiwan this weekend, when voters will choose whether to continue along a pro-independence path or opt for closer ties with China. That contest has added significance given the parallels with Hong Kong’s mass demonstrations against creeping Chinese encroachment. The electoral schedule among major developing economies this year is thinner than in 2019, but last year’s rash of protests around the world means that political developments in countries including India, Egypt and across Latin America will still be closely watched. Following is a timeline of the main elections in emerging and frontier markets through the rest of 2020: The room for political and economic ambiguity occupied by Taiwan in recent decades is being squeezed amid a battle for supremacy between its two biggest trading partners. Voters face a choice between building on the best US-Taiwan relations in 40 years under the current independence-supporting president, Tsai Ing-wen, or pivoting to a greater focus on trade, investment and potentially political integration with China, as favoured by the opposition Kuomintang.  The big theme to watch for will be the resurgence of hardliners in Iran’s parliament as a consequence of US President Donald Trump’s maximum pressure strategy. The moderate, conservative-reformist bloc that backs President Hassan Rouhani and which has controlled the chamber since 2016 is expected to collapse. But the US killing of commander Qassem Soleimani has overshadowed everything, and may have the effect of softening political divisions and uniting factions against the US  All 300 seats are up for grabs with President Moon Jae-in’s left-leaning Democratic Party of Korea trying to maintain control of the assembly. A setback for Moon could derail his policy priorities of increasing the minimum wage, reforming the property market and seeking rapprochement with North Korea as he serves out the remaining two years of his single, five-year term.  Gubernatorial elections in at least 15 regions will be a bellwether of the popular mood ahead of 2021 parliamentary elections seen as critical to Kremlin plans to manage the succession at the end of Vladimir Putin’s fourth presidential term in 2024. Simmering anger over living standards and rights sparked Moscow’s largest anti-Kremlin protests since 2011-2012 ahead of elections in September last year. The ruling United Russia party suffered setbacks despite tight control of the system.  The first electoral test for President Jair Bolsonaro and his allies. All eyes will be on the performance of candidates aligned with Bolsonaro’s far-right program, given that the president has lost popularity and the economy has been slow to recover. Similarly, investors will watch the Workers’ Party of former President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva after his release from jail. Leftist advances could throw into doubt the government’s market-friendly reforms.  President John Magufuli is the favorite to win and serve another five years. In his first term, the 60-year-old leader was hailed for reducing state inefficiency, but criticised for increasing restrictions on civil liberties and the rewriting of commercial contracts to increase benefits to the government.  Ghanaian President Nana Akufo-Addo’s achievement of average economic growth of more than 6% over the past three years is no guarantee of re-election in one of Africa’s most competitive democracies. Likely to stand for a second term, Akufo-Addo will face his predecessor, John Mahama, in a race that’s too close to call. While Akufo-Addo can trumpet economic governance, his New Patriotic Party has so far failed to meet election pledges on infrastructure and building factories.