On the surface, the latest numbers show President Donald Trump may be poised to deliver on one of his biggest economic promises: reducing the annual US trade deficit with China and the world. Dive into the numbers, though, and that accomplishment comes with plenty of caveats and even some worrying signs for the US economy. November trade data released Tuesday showed that the US goods and services deficit decreased by 0.7%, or $3.9 billion, in the first 11 months of 2019 from the same period a year earlier. That puts the annual shortfall on track to shrink for the first time since Trump took office. “Clearly the Trump tariffs are working,” White House adviser Peter Navarro told Bloomberg. For Trump, exports and imports are like assets and liabilities on a corporate balance sheet: If you’re in the red, you’re losing. Nevermind that the US has been running a trade gap on an annual basis since the mid-1970s. Or that deficits typically widen during expansions and shrink during recessions, as they have during the past few US contractions because waning domestic demand curbed imports. For the president, American manufacturing jobs have shifted overseas thanks to decades of poor trade policy and the deficit is the gauge that will show whether his strategy is working. Or will it? Yesterday’s numbers point to dueling realities. Yes, Trump’s tariffs are shifting trade flows in some intended ways. But not all the changing contours are positive signs. Here’s a closer look: Over the course of Trump’s term, the deficit has widened, so in that sense he has not succeeded. “What he has shown is if you put big enough tariffs on, that can change both the bilateral balance of trade,” said Brad Setser, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. “What he hasn’t shown is that his tariff-based strategy can generate a revival in US manufacturing.” Stay tuned. We’ll know more on Friday about how factory workers fared in 2019 when the Labor Department releases the employment report for December. Even if manufacturing jobs rise by the median economist estimate of 5,000 positions, it will be the second-worst calendar-year performance in the past decade for that key Trump constituency. Charting the Trade War US imports from China fell for a sixth straight month in November as the trade war between the world’s two largest economies dragged on before a tentative truce was announced in December. Officials from both sides are planning to sign the phase-one deal on January 15 in Washington. © 2020 Bloomberg