Pressure is rising on global health officials debating whether to sound an international alarm as the spread of the new coronavirus in countries outside China adds to a soaring case count. After the World Health Organisation stopped short of declaring a worldwide emergency last week, the rising toll of illness and deaths may push it to take action, and even recommend restrictions on trade and travel aimed at curbing the illness from spreading. Read: Coronavirus outbreak rattles the world The WHO has held off because of “fear that it will result in airlines not flying to China and different governments panicking about visas and exacerbating xenophobia,” said Devi Sridhar, a professor of global public health at the University of Edinburgh in Scotland. “But we’re kind of seeing all that anyway.” I still don’t understand why the Emergency Committee is not reconvening asap? https://t.co/UCl4fBfSt8 — Devi Sridhar (@devisridhar) January 29, 2020 Described as an “insidious” infection because some cases stem from people who don’t appear to be sick, the coronavirus has surfaced in more than a dozen countries in a matter of weeks, infecting close to 6 000 people, most of them in China. While deaths are comparatively low at 132, reports that the virus has spread within Japan, Germany and Vietnam are raising concerns about a global pandemic. WHO’s Emergency Committee was split last week on whether to declare a public health emergency of international concern, or PHEIC, members said at a press conference. In announcing their decision, the committee cited China’s quick action and open communication as well as the rights of sovereign nations to oversee local disturbances. Since then, cases have skyrocketed. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the WHO’s director general, travelled to Beijing where he met with President Xi Jinping on Tuesday. The agency has scheduled a press conference for this afternoon, but hasn’t announced a meeting of its Emergency Committee. It’s “imperative” that the committee review its decision on whether to declare an emergency, according to Richard Horton, editor in chief of the Lancet medical journal. “The needle is moving towards the affirmative,” he said on Twitter. International health regulations define a PHEIC as an extraordinary event posing “a public health risk to other states through the international spread of disease and to potentially require a coordinated international response.” The coronavirus epidemic “clearly fits the definition,” according to Rebecca Katz, professor and director of the Center for Global Health Science and Security at Georgetown University. The declaration would allow countries to take a coordinated approach to fighting the virus, with WHO at the helm, and motivate governments to take effective measures, she said. Decisions on a PHEIC always involve politics, according to the University of Edinburgh’s Sridhar. West African countries hit by the largest Ebola virus outbreak on record discouraged a declaration, mainly because of concern about economic consequences, she said. It’s now imperative to recall WHO’s IHR Emergency Committee to review once again the evidence for and against declaring a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. The needle is moving towards the affirmative. — richard horton (@richardhorton1) January 26, 2020 Yet companies and governments are taking their own steps to minimize the impact on the public, employees and economies. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommended against non-essential travel to China, while carriers including United Airlines Holdings Inc., British Airways and Cathay Pacific Airways cut flights to the country’s mainland. Almost 9% of flights scheduled to or from China were scrapped between January 23 and January 27, according to research from Cirium, which analyzes air travel. A WHO declaration would put the weight of the international community behind restrictions and link them to health benchmarks, Sridhar said. It would also send a clear message to the public that the epidemic is serious, said Michael Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota. “It’s like when a trusted adviser says buy or sell,” he said. “I think we want to send a message to the world that it’s really important.” © 2020 Bloomberg L.P.