The Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa), incorporating the South African Rail Commuter Corporation, Metrorail, Shosholoza Meyl, Intersite and Autopax, was launched in March 2009. Then chair Sfiso Buthelezi proudly proclaimed that transport is the heartbeat of the economy. But over the ensuing decade Prasa sucked up all the oxygen, and left a toxic sludge. In a nutshell, in the year to the end of March 2019 Prasa: Incurred a deficit in revenue of R1.7 billion (2018: R1.4 billion surplus). However, without the government grant of R3.7 billion (2018: R4.7 billion), the deficit would have been R5.4 billion (2018: R3.3 billion deficit); Squandered billions; Placed lives at risk due to attacks taking place on trains and numerous faults such as signal problems; Negatively impacted productivity as employees cannot get to work on time; Could not safeguard its assets from vandalism and theft; Could not provide appropriate documentation to enable the external contractors to write up the books; and Could not provide appropriate audit evidence to enable the Office of the Auditor-General (AG) to do its job. The AG issued a disclaimer of opinion on the 2019 annual financial statements. That means no reliance can be placed on the financial statements. The shame of it. A disclaimer of opinion is worse than the qualified opinion issued on the 2018 annual report. Read: Prasa’s financial management out of control Recently Transport Minister Fikile Mbalula announced that he has dissolved the interim board, and has placed Prasa under administration. Read: Prasa placed under administration – minister AG report to Parliament The AG had 79 findings, including the following: Irregular expenditure amounted to R27.3 billion (2018: R26.2 billion); 41 cases with criminal intent are currently under investigation by the Hawks. Management was not able to provide any report or indication of when these matters will be finalised. Fruitless and wasteful expenditure amounted to R383 million (2018: R1 billion). The AG could not verify the value of property, plant and equipment (PPE) of R42.6 billion. There was insufficient appropriate audit evidence to show that management had properly accounted for the unspent conditional grants and capital subsidy and grants amortised in accordance with Generally Recognised Accounting Practice (Grap) requirements. Prasa did not keep proper records, did not keep sufficient or appropriate audit evidence, did not follow required accounting conventions, and did not maintain complete governance records (minutes of meetings of the board, its sub-committees and executive committee). The AG also raised material findings on the reliability of the reported performance information. There were numerous material irregularities, including the locomotive saga (R2.5 billion has gone down the drain, and the locomotives are not fit for purpose), and the appointment of overhaul and upgrade contractors resulted in Prasa overpaying for the work. Prasa has not provided evidence of any consequence management. The AG has made recommendations, and will follow up on them The AG will be following up on various investigations and the implementation of planned actions (disciplinary steps, financial recovery, and civil and criminal cases arising from the outcome of the investigation) during the next audit. These include: The unfair procurement process for the R3.5 billion contract purchase of locomotives. The appointment of general overhaul and upgrade contractors since 2009, which has been handed over to the Special Investigating Unit. The procurement process followed in the appointment of the signalling contractor, which is likely to result in a material financial loss. The processes followed in appointing suppliers to provide bus services in the Western Cape, surveillance services (drones), security services, emergency repairs to signalling equipment, and the control of vegetation. Other investigations Various other investigations are under way: Allegations of maladministration relating to financial mismanagement, conflict of interest, and procurement and appointment irregularities. A forensic investigation instituted by National Treasury in accordance with the remedial action recommended by the Public Protector in her August 2015 report. An investigation in terms of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act. An investigation into allegations relating to the contravention of the Competition Act. The Directorate for Priority Crime Investigations has been investigating the R3.5 billion locomotive saga since 2015. The Special Investigating Unit has been requested to investigate the appointment of general overhaul and upgrade contractors Is Prasa financially solvent? Its plant, property and equipment is valued at R42.6 billion, and this represents 54.3% of its total assets. However, the AG could not verify this value. This places a large question mark over whether the financial assets exceed the liabilities. In the years 2008 to 2019, Prasa included in its revenue some R39 billion of government grants and subsidies. Citing “material inconsistencies”, the AG was not able to confirm the unspent capital subsidy and grants figure of R44.8 billion (2018: R40.1 billion). With no consequence management and no financial control, Prasa has proved to be the ultimate gravy train.