Despite the negative sentiment held by many South African investors last year, 2019 was actually a good time to be in the markets. Of the 1 147 locally registered unit trusts available to retail investors, only 41 did not deliver a positive return. That is just 3.6%. Taking a rough idea of inflation into account (given that we don’t have official figures yet), only 148 unit trusts failed to achieve a return of greater than 4.5%. This means that 87.1% of funds produced a real return for investors. The median fund was up 9.2% for the year, and the average fund return was 9.9%. This is around 5% ahead of inflation, which is a healthy outcome. Mining in the money The standout performers were commodity funds, with four of the top five unit trusts for the year focused on mining stocks. International equities also delivered exceptional returns for local investors. Source: Morningstar Resource funds were clearly buoyed by the rise in the stock prices of a number of local miners. These included Gold Fields, which was up over 90% for the year, Harmony, which gained just under 100%, and Impala Platinum, which surged nearly 300%. It is therefore not surprising that six of the seven actively managed South African resources unit trusts make it onto this list. It is, however, noteworthy that all six outperformed the FTSE/JSE Resource 10 index. The cyclical nature of commodities does from time to time produce this kind of massive outperformance from mining stocks, but history suggests that this does not continue. In fact, it is often followed by long periods of underperformance. The only general equity fund in the top 15 performers is the Investec Value Fund, which has also been heavily exposed to commodities for some time. The makeup of the portfolio has, however, begun to shift in recent months, indicating that the fund manager is no longer seeing the same opportunity in this part of the market. Tech continues to shine A second significant group on this list is made up of those funds focused on the US technology stocks. These are the two Sygnia funds and the 1nvest S&P 500 Info Tech Index Feeder Fund. These portfolios are heavily exposed to the likes of Alphabet, Apple and Facebook, which have been exceptional performers on the New York Stock Exchange. Apple gained over 85% last year, while Facebook was up more than 55%, and Alphabet climbed close to 30%. These tech stocks have been leading the US, and even global, market for some time and there have been questions for many years around how long they can continue to deliver this kind of growth. Many investors believe their dominance is unprecedented and will therefore continue. Value investors, on the other hand, are certain that there must be a mean reversion at some point. Property funds and small caps struggle At the other end of the scale, the worst-performing unit trust in South Africa lost 22.3% over the year. This means the gap between the highest and lowest fund returns in 2019 was 91.1%. That is an extremely wide dispersion. Source: Morningstar Four property funds appear on this list as the listed real estate sector continued to struggle last year. The FTSE/JSE SA Listed Property Index did, however, return 1.9% in 2019, so the performance of the Nedgroup Investments Property Fund, in particular, is substantially below the benchmark. There are also four small-cap funds in this group, plus the Mosaic Flexible Prescient Fund, which is predominantly invested in local small-cap stocks despite being a flexible portfolio. The FTSE/JSE Small Cap Index was down 4.1% in 2019, so these managers continued to struggle to extract returns from this part of the market. It is odd to see a worldwide equity fund in this list when the MSCI World Index was up more than 27% in rand terms last year. The Prime Worldwide Equity Fund is, however, more than 75% invested in South African equities, and the portfolio has lost nearly 18% since its inception in February 2017.