Thirteen days after his 99th birthday, Soweto’s most legendary black businessman Dr Richard Maponya passed away in the early hours of Monday morning in Johannesburg. In a short statement, his family said Maponya’s passing came after a short illness. Asking for privacy during this time, they confirmed that funeral arrangements will be announced in due course. Maponya’s business success in retail and property development is well-known, with one of his crowning moments being the opening of the Maponya Mall – Soweto’s largest shopping centre – by former South African President Nelson Mandela in 2007. Maponya Mall shopping centre in Soweto, the brainchild of Dr Maponya, opened in 2007. Today the mall is 51% owned by JSE-listed Redefine Properties. Image: Dean Hutton/Bloomberg Tributes for a rare entrepreneur Maponya’s business career began in the retail sector in the 1950s when he and his wife Marina opened a milk distribution company in Soweto. Together they expanded their business empire to include interests in retail and automotive sectors, filling stations and property development. His entrepreneurial flair saw him have interests in many business ventures over several decades. Tributes have come in from numerous quarters following news of Maponya’s death, including from President Cyril Ramaphosa and several business leaders and organisations. “We have lost a pioneer, a trailblazer and a man of extraordinary fortitude who paved the way for the racial transformation of the South African economy,” said Ramaphosa. “Dr Maponya’s life is a testament to resilience, determination and the power of vision: namely to see black business grow to assume its full role as the key participant and driver of our economy.” “He was of that rare breed of entrepreneurs who would not be held back or become disheartened by difficult operating conditions – in fact, having obstacles put in his path drove him even further to succeed. “He understood that to get to the top, one has to begin at the very bottom. He began his career as a stock taker, and today, over 50 years later, the Maponya Mall in Soweto stands as a towering symbol of perseverance and achievement. “Dr Maponya embodied sustainability and corporate social responsibility and investment well before these concepts were academically defined. He was a patriot who believed in the power of building businesses that build communities,” added Ramaphosa. The Presidency noted in its statement that Maponya was a founding member of the National African Federated Chamber of Commerce (NAFCOC) and chairman of the African Chamber of Commerce. Maponya has won several business accolades over the years, including the South African Council of Shopping Centres (SACSC) Pioneer Award in 2013. “It is with sadness that we received the news that Dr Richard Maponya passed away today…. On behalf of the South African Council of Shopping Centres we extend our heartfelt condolences to his family and all those who were close to him,” said Amanda Stops, CEO of SACSC. “As a recipient of the SACSC Pioneer Award in 2013, he will always be remembered for his innovation and forward thinking over the years, and for the substantial mark he has made on our industry,” she added. “We are saddened at Dr Maponya’s passing, especially as he just celebrated his 99th birthday in December,” said Neil Gopal, CEO of the South African Property Owners Association. “May God grant his family all the strength during this difficult time… He was an SA business icon and well known in the property industry. His legacy lives on via his projects and investments.” South African Chamber of Commerce and Industry (SACCI) CEO Alan Mukoki also offered condolences to the Maponya family and saluted Dr Maponya’s contribution to the country’s business sector. “There can never be enough words to pay tribute to this legend, who against the most difficult challenges and odds, rose to be a shining beacon of light for black business in the apartheid days, and continued to make a massive contribution to the broader business community in post-apartheid SA,” said Mukoki. “Dr Richard Maponya was not only an activist, but a visionary and innovative leader in business and SA society in general. His achievements are incomparable, given the huge obstacles he had to overcome and endure in building his business dynasty,” he added.