I’m 25 and in my second last year of studying for my teaching degree. I’ve been investing in fixed deposits at banks since I was 18. With historic rates of 7.5% to 8.9%, I’ve done reasonably well. I’m looking for any opportunities with higher returns on similar or slightly higher levels of risk. I refuse to let capital and returns be eradicated by stock turmoil, fees and underperformance (as no guarantees are given) hence my preference for guaranteed investments such as fixed deposits. I’m seeking ways to grow my funds with high rates and low-risk. I might be searching for unicorns but dreams are important.  “In investing, what is comfortable is rarely profitable” – Robert Arnott. In a world of unicorns, bulls and bears, finding the right solution and not missing out on opportunities can be daunting and a bit overwhelming. There are many different products, asset classes and fund managers. Local or offshore, conservative or higher risk? These are difficult decisions to make. My advice is to start a financial portfolio with the guidance of a wealth adviser – helping to determine your goals and risk appetite. What we consider as ‘risk’ is, however, the number one mindset change we need to make. Are we afraid of ’risk’ or are we afraid of volatility – because these are two very different concepts? Understanding how asset classes perform, and the different risks all of them hold, will make it easier to navigate markets and investing. Each asset class plays a different role in your portfolio and hold different risks, as well as different potential returns.  In the long term – higher returns will require taking on more volatility and riding out market cycles. As in the lyrics of the song ‘Something just like this’ – you will need to decide “Where do you want to go? How much do you want to risk?” The underlying table displays the calendar year returns of indices representing the different asset classes over the past 10 years to July 2019. Source: Momentum This shows that asset classes are all volatile in their own way, and timing them is often impossible. How volatile they can be is, however, different. The graph below shows the return of a few different portfolios over the past few years. Comparing the following allocations:  Source: Morningstar Direct, PSG Wealth If you were invested in cash in 2019, you would have received an average return on your investment of 7% to 8%, as mentioned in your question. For the same period, if you were invested offshore, the story might have looked quite different. The one-year return for the S&P500 (at time of writing) is 27.94, and the Dow Jones 27.19% (source: Bloomberg). The one-year return for the JSE is 15.967%. Referring back to my first diagram – this can change very quickly. In 2008, the local market dropped -21.7%, the recovery also happened that quickly again in 2009. Investing in growth assets (equity exposure) will deliver a higher return over the longer term, but this will also be more volatile. There will always be market and economic cycles – riding the wave is the important part – and not making any emotional decisions. When investing in equities you are buying components of a company. If this is a fundamentally good company, your ownership will always have value – the unit price will just vary as markets move up and down. It is only when you sell these units at a low price that you are ‘losing money’. Paul Samuelson said: “Investing should be more like watching paint dry or watching grass grow. If you want excitement, take $800 and go to Las Vegas.” Having a long-term mindset when it comes to investing is imperative – without having this mindset you will always be disappointed or get tied up in the emotional roller-coaster of market cycles. Different asset classes hold different risks Source: Adapted from www.getsmarteraboutmoney.ca here. I believe in first determining your goals and deciding on an appropriate strategy from there. The strategy will most probably also be different for the different products in your portfolio: Building a successful portfolio will require you to ensure you have comprehensive planning in place for every aspect of your life – risk planning (Life cover, income protection, medical aid), fiduciary planning, as well as structuring your investment portfolio. This will not only focus on retirement but on shorter-term financial goals as well. As our lives change with time – so do our portfolios, and it is important to make these changes in different phases of life. This will also look different for every person as financial circumstances differ, goals differ and risk appetite will not always be similar for everyone. 