The year 2019 will go down as one of the most difficult, if not brutal, for tech companies in the United States as they were called out on privacy issues, antitrust matters, and outright shady behaviour. Last year’s hearings into privacy violation, the selling of user data, and the use of social media as an enabler of populist rhetoric and fake news marked a momentum shift in regulation for the tech industry. Unsurprisingly, Amazon, Facebook and Google are part of what I label ‘tech industry developments to follow with keen interest’ in 2020. It is obvious why: the predominant reason is political. This year’s US presidential race in particular. A Facebook vice president recently wrote in a memo that “the platform could ultimately be responsible for President Trump’s reelection”. This was a jolting reminder of the power, reach and influence of the social media platform. There are other reasons too, such as user data protection and privacy, the risk these factors pose to democracy, and how the European Union (EU) antitrust ruling and other legislation will affect our world going forward. Scrutiny What fascinated me during the Facebook congressional hearings, and the tech industry in general, is how some of the founders and executives couldn’t understand the sudden focus and scrutiny of the behaviour of their companies. I am not surprised. After all, the industry and its growth and innovation have remained relatively unchecked for years. The regulators finally regulating the sector was bound to happen. If you watch videos of Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg’s testimony before the congressional hearings, you will see he had the look of a man who didn’t understand why these government people were bullying his company or the industry when their innovation has done so much for the world. Given the power these men and women wield, that kind of disconnect, intended or unintended, should worry us. Considering that these are companies with revenues larger than the GDPs of many countries, their power, influence and domination make them key players in shaping politics, influencing election outcomes and even determining democracy. Furthermore, these companies are also drivers of capitalism, which is defined by accumulation, displacement and market domination. Dominance Facebook and Google account for more than 50% of all online advertising, while Amazon dominates the market share of consumer spending in the US. Yet, and despite the billions in revenue they generate, workers in these tech companies have organised and mobilise to bring attention to their workplace struggles such as working hours, wages and sexual harassment. Moreover, these tech workplace issues have become intertwined with the public backlash against privacy and larger political issues. On their own and collectively, the growth of the tech industry and its companies has outpaced any government ability to keep up in regulating them. This has produced a tech industry that until recently deemed itself above scrutiny and, to some extent, the law. Consider, for example, the election-related content that is allowed on platforms such as Facebook, where fact-checking on political advertising is not a priority. Neither is the protection of user privacy and the preventing of misinformation. Hard-hitting questions The most significant development from the Facebook congressional hearings has been the detailed, well-researched and hard-hitting questions posed to Zuckerberg by the women in congress. Democratic Party representative Katie Porter, for example, asked about the working conditions, hours and mental health benefits of Facebook content moderators, challenging the founder to put himself in the workers’ shoes. For outsiders and the public, it is logical that this scrutiny is taking place. This is an industry typified by companies that have disregarded privacy rules, availed their platforms for the spreading of fake news and polarising views, and exploited their workers. For lawmakers to finally start reining in the industry wasn’t unexpected – it was long overdue. The fact that two developments have taken shape in space of month leads me to believe that the regulation momentum is about to be stepped up a notch. First, in December, the EU started preliminary investigations into the data uses and/or practices of Facebook and Google to determine if they adhered or broke the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) rules. Second, January 1 this year saw the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) come into effect. It regulates the selling and buying of data by companies in such a way that the companies must disclose to consumers what they are doing with that data. In turn, consumers can use the CCPA to ask what their personal data is used for, and to stop companies from selling it. Together, the CCPA and GDPR indicate a shift. They show that lawmakers are finally using regulation to rein in the tech industry and its behemoth companies after a decade of little if not zero accountability. As we shall discover, the outcome or ruling of the EU’s GDPR will have a significant bearing – and not just on the two companies. It will have serious implications for the sector. And so, as 2020 settles in, it is worth paying attention to the influence of social media giants on US political campaigns and the presidential election – and how lawmakers in both the US and EU deal with them on that specific aspect.