The transformation of bank pricing over the past decade has not just been about the shift from branches to digital channels such as internet banking and mobile apps. There has also been a deliberate shift in pricing to disincentivise the use of cash. But over time there has been a not-so-subtle shift towards disincentivising customers from drawing cash at ATMs in favour of withdrawing it at supermarket till points. The changes in pricing have been stark. A decade ago, drawing cash at a till point cost anything from around R1 to R5.20, depending on the account. Charges were higher for the failed Post Office and bank-collaboration Mzansi accounts (R4.50 or R4.70). These fees were not too far from the cost of ATM withdrawals (in some cases, cash at a till was higher). But over time, these charges have declined to the point that, for many accounts, the flat rate is R1 per withdrawal (at the higher end, withdrawals at retailers are entirely free, or a reasonable number are). A simple comparison between the costs of withdrawing cash at an ATM (even the bank’s own) versus a supermarket till point shows just how expensive the former is. On entry-level transactional accounts, a withdrawal of R1 000 at an ATM will typically cost upwards of R6, while the same withdrawal at a till will cost between R1 and R2. This is the difference between 0.6% and 0.1% in fees. At lower withdrawal amounts, the R6 (or higher) charge becomes material. * All fees from January 1, 2020 On mid-level and upper-end bank accounts, most banks offer free withdrawals at either till points or their own ATMs up to a certain limit per month (ranging from R2 000 to R10 000, depending on the target segment). Thereafter, withdrawals are generally charged for and getting large amounts of cash from ATMs becomes very expensive because of the pricing structure. The rate for disbursements is charged per R100, meaning that a withdrawal of R1 000 costs R19/R20 at most banks, or 2% of the transaction. Drawing cash at another bank’s ATM is ruinously expensive. * All fees from January 1, 2020 The reasons for these shifts in pricing are simple. Bank executives will admit that the cost of cash is very high. These are direct – chiefly the cost of building and operating an ATM network and the associated security required, as well as the costs of transporting and delivering cash. Given the risks around cash, these costs have increased substantially over time. But as Mastercard’s Cost of Cash study points out, cash has indirect costs too (“travel costs, time-related costs, foregone interest and theft”), but these are mainly borne by consumers. The study, in partnership with Genesis, quantified the cost of cash in 2016. It found that cash costs “consumers in South Africa about R23 billion, or 0.52% of GDP, and that poorer communities carried a disproportionate share of these costs”. Read: Banks cut fees as competition intensifies This is evident from the pricing comparison above, where only entry-level bank accounts charge for withdrawals (at till points or ATMs). At middle-market and higher income accounts, a certain amount (or number) of withdrawals are bundled into bank charges. Still, retailers benefit from disbursing cash, particularly at the scale at which groups like Shoprite and Pick n Pay operate. They are paid a fixed nominal fee (far less than R1) by banks for these transactions. They attract customers to stores who will generally buy something, and the disbursement of cash lowers the amounts of cash they need to process. Expect fees for cash withdrawals at bank ATMs to continue increasing, and for those at retailer till points to shift down over time. These will likely never be completely ‘free’ given the inherent costs, but the number of ATMs is not going to grow materially from this point. Already, the shift in behaviour is evident, particularly at the lower end of the market. Soon, the number of ATMs in the country will start to slowly shrink.