Asian stocks retreated with European futures Tuesday after a mixed Wall Street session, amid caution over economic risks from virus-related curbs and ongoing US fiscal stimulus talks. The dollar steadied. A gauge of Asia-Pacific equities was set for its worst drop this month as shares fell in South Korea, Hong Kong and Japan, where the government suspended its nationwide travel campaign amid record coronavirus cases. Australian coal stocks slid on reports China formally banned imports. S&P 500 contracts edged higher after the gauge capped its longest slide since September to trade about 1.5% below its December 8 record. Oil fell and Treasury yields were little changed. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership.  Investor optimism about the start of vaccine shots has given way to concern over whether a stimulus bill from a bipartisan group of lawmakers will gain traction. The virus continued to rage in the US, threatening harsher restrictions across the nation. New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio warned that people should be prepared for a full shutdown. European governments are also tightening measures. “Signs of market fatigue are more prevalent today than a month ago, even as the popular average is near all-time highs,” wrote Paul Nolte, a portfolio manager at Kingsview Investment Management. “The much-awaited correction could come as investors tire of Washington, worry about the Covid cases over the holidays, or some other concern that is likely to pass in a few months.” Elsewhere, industrial output and retail sales data showed China’s recovery gathered pace in November, putting the economy further ahead of its peers as the only major one likely to expand this year. The nation injected cash into its financial system by offering medium-term loans, in the latest effort to ensure banks have sufficient liquidity. The yuan ticked lower. Meanwhile, President-elect Joe Biden sought to dispel any questions about the legitimacy of his election victory and called on the American people to accept the outcome hours after the Electoral College sealed his win. Here are some key events coming up: These are the main moves in markets: