The dollar extended this week’s decline and Asian stocks advanced with US and European futures as investors mulled speculation Washington is edging closer to a stimulus deal. Treasuries ticked lower. Stocks saw modest gains across most of Asia with Australia outperforming. S&P 500 futures edged higher. Congressional leaders in the US are haggling over the final details of nearly $900 billion in coronavirus aid. Earlier, the Federal Reserve disappointed some traders who expected changes to its bond buying program, with the yield on 10-year Treasuries extending gains above 0.9%. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Elsewhere, Bitcoin surpassed $22,000 for the first time. Oil held gains in the wake of a surprise decline in US crude inventories. New Zealand bonds sank after better-than-expected economic-growth data.  Investors await developments on stimulus talks after months of deadlock amid signs the economic recovery is faltering. Lawmakers are rushing to finalise the package in time to attach it to crucial government spending legislation ahead of a vote later this week. Meanwhile, the Fed strengthened its commitment to support the US economy, promising to maintain its massive asset purchase program until it sees “substantial further progress” in employment and inflation. Fed Chair Jerome Powell said the case for fiscal stimulus is “very, very strong” as the pandemic continues to rage. “The 12-month outlook looks quite a bit better, because we have high conviction now that there is going to be mass vaccination,” Brian Nick, chief investment strategist at Nuveen, said on Bloomberg TV. “There’s not going to be as acute of a health crisis as we’re experiencing right now.” On the virus front, the first known allergic reaction to the Pfizer Inc. Covid-19 vaccine in the US was reported in Alaska as some snarls began to emerge in the effort to send the shots across the country. The number of coronavirus deaths reached another daily record in the US, while Tokyo warned that the city’s medical system is under strain. Here are some key events coming up: These are some of the main moves in markets: