Rudolf Pienaar, chief development and investment officer of JSE-listed Growthpoint Properties, has passed away. “It is with great sadness that Growthpoint announces the passing of Mr Rudolf Pienaar on Monday, December 14. 2020,” South Africa’s largest real estate investment trust (Reit) announced in a Sens statement on Tuesday. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
 To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Pienaar, 60, had been a long-time director at Growthpoint Properties SA and had a more than 35-year track record in the local commercial property industry. He played a key role in the growth of the green building movement in the country and was former chairman of the Green Building Council of South Africa (GBCSA). During his tenure at the GBCSA, he represented the council as a director on the board of the World Green Building Council. “Rudolf was much loved by all in Growthpoint and was well known in the Reit industry. His warmth, generosity, energy and the passion with which he approached everything will be hugely missed by all that had the privilege of working closely with him,” Growthpoint said. Read: Exclusive: Growthpoint’s ambitious Sandton Summit plan “His passing will certainly leave a void within the leadership of Growthpoint and the larger South African property community – in which he played a significant role. Rudolf was a devoted family man and our thoughts and prayers are with his family as they mourn his loss,” it added. Pienaar was also until recently chair of the sustainability committee of the South African Property Owner’s Association (Sapoa), the country’s main commercial property advocacy body. At Sapoa, he also contributed to dealing with issues around the escalation of commercial property rates – a major bugbear for the industry locally. Pienaar is survived by his wife Elsabe, son Jean and daughter Mareli.