Stocks fell with US futures Tuesday as a new variant of the coronavirus and a slew of lockdowns and travel curbs dimmed the outlook for the global economic recovery. The dollar advanced. Shares fell more than 1% in most markets and a gauge of Asia-Pacific shares slid the most this month. S&P 500 futures declined after the benchmark fell Monday, with Tesla the biggest drag in its first day of trading on the index. European contracts erased gains. Treasuries ticked higher, while crude oil slumped for a second day. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership.  The virus outbreak continues to escalate. Taiwan reported its first locally transmitted infection since April, ending the world’s longest stretch without a domestic infection and highlighting how insidious the virus remains. Global stocks have pulled back after touching a record high last week. The emergence of the variant coronavirus strain in Britain has dented the return-to-work trade, and for now is overshadowing a $900 billion US pandemic relief package and the initial rollout of vaccines. US lawmakers cleared the spending legislation, which now passes to President Donald Trump to sign. The bill will provide some relief, but “will do little to accelerate the arrival of an economic recovery,” David Kelly, chief global strategist at JPMorgan Asset Management, said in a note. “Investors should also recognise that, after a surprisingly good year for portfolio returns, asset prices look stretched.” The pound weakened amid continuing Brexit trade talks. UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson made a fresh proposal to secure an 11th-hour trade deal with the European Union. Here are some key events coming up: These are the main moves in markets: