The dollar climbed and stocks were mixed as the worsening pandemic and lack of progress on Brexit trade talks sapped risk appetite despite an agreement on a US stimulus package. Crude oil sank about 3%. The pound was under pressure, slumping more than 1%, as UK authorities tackled a fast-spreading new coronavirus strain and as an official said “significant differences” remain in trade talks with the European Union. The Australian dollar fell amid new restrictions in Sydney due to a growing virus cluster. Treasuries ticked higher with gold. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. S&P 500 futures dipped and European contracts tumbled. Major Asia Pacific equity markets were little changed on Monday. Congressional leaders reached a deal on roughly $900 billion of outlays to support the US economy amid escalating virus cases.  The text of the US stimulus legislation was still being written, but Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said on the Senate floor that the “bipartisan breakthrough” needed to get the bill passed in the House and Senate had been clinched. Votes on the bill are expected Monday. “For many, the end of 2020 cannot come soon enough,” said Simon Ballard, chief economist at First Abu Dhabi Bank Pjsc. “The pathogen has wrought mayhem across financial markets and so we expect the New Year wish of many market participants to be that the arrival and initial distribution of coronavirus vaccines now signals light at the end of a very tiring and debilitating tunnel.” More than 16 million Britons are now required to stay at home as a full lockdown came into force in London and the southeast of England, with some European countries taking steps to limit travel with the UK In the US, Covid-19 immunisations with the newly authorised Moderna Inc. shot will likely begin Monday. Thailand was one of the worst performing equity markets globally, with the SET index sinking as much as 3.7%, as authorities said they might need to extend restrictions more widely amid a surge in virus cases. Here are some key events coming up: These are the main moves in markets: 