If things turn out as expected, this could be the future of business banking. Absa recently launched its Business Evolve Zero transactional account offering for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) – and it comes with no monthly cost. Absa Cashflow Manager is a free add-on to any Business Evolve account that lets you generate quotes, invoices, financial statements and run your payroll – all from Absa’s online banking platform. New clients can sign up for the Business Evolve Zero account on Absa’s online banking platform or by downloading the Absa banking app (from Saturday, December 19) and signing up. The Business Evolve account sign-up process is designed to be intuitive and includes free access to Cashflow Manager. It also comes with free access to Absa online banking, a debit card and a savings account. “Absa Business Evolve Zero is available to sole proprietors with an annual turnover of up to R5 million,” says Bongiwe Gangeni, deputy chief executive of Absa Retail and Business Bank. “Thanks to the complimentary and cloud-based Cashflow Manager, entrepreneurs can access real-time business analytics, produce online quotes and invoices and access a full payroll feature. Staying on top of their financials is now significantly easier for business owners.” It’s what’s in the cloud-based Cashflow Manager software that should excite SME business owners. Entrepreneurs can generate a value-added tax (Vat) report to assist them in filing returns to the South African Revenue Service (Sars). At the same time, data from the transactional account can be used to generate financial reports that are accessible from any internet-connected device, including a mobile phone. No accounting knowledge is required. The accounting software is sophisticated enough to generate a quote, issue an invoice, and then convert that to the debtor’s book. The same software generates financial statements for banking, tax and other purposes. Simplicity “You don’t need an accountant to manage this software. What it also does is give us an understanding of the cash flow needs of the client. We want to be in a position to see that if the business is short of cash as pay day approaches, we could potentially extend an overdraft or make cash available for stock or working capital purposes,” says Matthew Hunter, head of General Banking Solutions at Absa. The Absa Cashflow Manager will provide data on the business transaction history which will then allow the bank to offer services or products. For example, there may be potential surplus cash for investment, he adds. For small businesses, speed to credit is important, and over time Absa will utilise this data to make credit decisions earlier. If the account and business management and accounting system attract no monthly fee, how does the bank make money from this? “We are not initially making money on this,” says Hunter. “This is an investment for us. We see this as a partnership with start-up and small businesses to assist them in their growth journey. The SME and start-ups of today will become the bank’s corporate clients tomorrow.” Cashflow Manager is available to new clients that take any business banking account, as well as existing Absa SMEs. The Business Evolve Zero account is a pay-as-you-transact solution which offers unlimited free Absa-to-Absa debit orders and Absa-to-Absa inter-account transfers. Fees for electronic funds transfers (EFTs), debit card swipes and external debit orders are low. Bundles An Evolve bundle 35 pricing package (R235 per month) is also available for those SME clients who prefer the certainty that a pricing bundle can bring. For business bank clients that have a higher turnover and transact more frequently, Absa has launched Business Evolve and offers Evolve 60 (R415pm), Evolve 90 (R590pm) and Evolve Pay-as-you-transact (R85pm). The sign-up process requires the normal Fica (Financial Intelligence Centre Act) documents, after which the client receives a transactional and savings account, with the option of a debit card and a savings ‘pocket’ to park surplus cash and earn interest. Youtube demos of some features of the app accounting software are available here and here. “SMEs find it challenging to survive past the first few years, and we want to ensure that the offering is cost effective, particularly for start-ups with lower-volume, lower-value transactions,” says Gangeni. Hunter adds that the SME segment remains a core focus area for Absa, and new features will be added to the offering on a continuous basis. Brought to you by Absa Business Banking.