Stocks edged higher on Friday as investors mulled the recent strength in global equities while awaiting key data on the US labour market. Oil extended gains from a nine-month high after an OPEC+ deal. The Stoxx Europe 600 index posted a modest gain at the open, led by energy shares. S&P 500 futures ticked higher. Most Asian benchmarks rose, with South Korea and Taiwan outperforming. The dollar headed for its biggest weekly decline in five, while Treasury yields nudged higher. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Data later Friday is expected to show US employment gains probably slowed only modestly in November despite a record surge of coronavirus cases.  Global equities remain around record highs as investors bet positive vaccine developments can help sustain an economic recovery next year. Uncertainty remains about a US stimulus package, where a bipartisan proposal endorsed by Democratic leaders as a basis for negotiations is luring increased interest from Republicans, lifting the chances for a deal by year-end. “If we do see earnings growth start to pickup, perhaps 25% to 30% on the S&P 500 next year, and if we see rates remain low and stimulus in place, that remains a good backdrop for risk assets,” Mona Mahajan, investment strategist at Allianz Global Investors, said on Bloomberg TV. Oil climbed as OPEC+ reached an agreement to ease its output cuts next year more gradually than previously planned. The Pentagon added four more Chinese companies — including China National Offshore Oil Corp. — to a list of firms it says are owned or controlled by the country’s military, exposing them to increased scrutiny and potential sanctions by the US. These are some key events coming up: Here are the main moves in markets: 