The Airline Pilots’ Association South Africa (Alpa-SA) has launched an urgent process to interdict the South African Airways (SAA) business rescue practitioners from continuing with a lockout of its members. Alpa-SA is the parent body of the SAA Pilots Association (Saapa), which represents 96% of the pilots employed by SAA. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. At the heart of the impasse between the airline and Alpa-SA is the three-decade long Regulatory Agreement (RA) between Saapa members and the airline, which the business rescue practitioners want terminated. The rescue practitioners issued a 48-hour lockout notice to Saapa last week Wednesday, preventing the association’s members from accessing the company’s premises until they agree to new employment terms and conditions. Read:
Three-decade long pilots agreement is unconstitutional – DPE
SAA pilots given 48-hour ‘lockout’ notice, administrators say Saapa members will not be entitled to any remuneration or benefits from the airline for the duration of the lockout. Rescue practitioners Siviwe Dongwana and Les Matuson have instituted separate court proceedings to have the RA set aside, citing among others the onerous burden that the agreement puts on the airline’s precarious finances. Following several failed internal attempts to resolve the impasse, the dispute was referred to the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) in October. The parties were however unable to reach an agreement; proceedings at the CCMA failed to resolve the dispute and a period of more than 30 days has lapsed since the dispute was referred by SAA to the CCMA. Saapa says it has agreed to terminate the RA and has placed alternative employment terms and conditions on the table. Alpa-SA and Saapa want the Labour Court to declare the lockout unlawful and unprotected. In court papers filed on Monday, Saapa’s chief negotiator Glen Smith says the lockout is in contravention of various sections of the Labour Relations Act (LRA) in that it exempts certain members of Saapa from the lockout and that, given the fact that SAA has ceased to operate, there is no “workplace” as defined by the LRA. SAA has been under business rescue for a year and has ceased all commercial operations except for repatriation and cargo flights earlier this year. Additionally, airline aircraft leases have been terminated and the airline is under care and maintenance. “Given SAA’s circumstances, there is no ‘place or places where [the members of Saapa] work’ – no physical place of work constituted by any physical premises of SAA or any cockpits of any SAA airplanes – and thus no ‘workplace’ as envisaged in terms of the definition of ‘lockout’ in Section 213 of the LRA,” Smith says. Employees who have been exempted from the lockout include members of Saapa, making the lockout invalid. “It is not open to the employer to choose which of the employees are to be locked out and which of the employees are not to be locked out,” Smith says. The rescue practitioners want Saapa members to accept new terms and conditions, which include new salary scales. The pilots, like other SAA employees, have not been paid since March. Even those who have signed voluntary severance packages, which includes 224 pilots, have yet to be paid. This is despite the allocation of R1.5 billion by the Department of Public Enterprises for the payment of salaries. Read:
South Africa opens new battle with unions over airline salaries
This is where SAA got its R10.5bn from