Gold advanced after the Federal Reserve strengthened its commitment to supporting the recovery in the world’s largest economy, and US lawmakers made progress in getting a fiscal stimulus deal over the line. The precious metal is on course for a third weekly gain, with the Fed promising at its final policy meeting of 2020 to maintain its massive asset-purchase program until it sees “substantial further progress” in employment and inflation. Chair Jerome Powell said that the case for fiscal stimulus is “very, very strong.” Gold’s rise has been aided by a weaker dollar. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership.  Bullion is set to cap 2020 with the biggest annual gain in a decade on the prospects of further stimulus and curbs in several parts of the world as the coronavirus continues to wreak havoc. The US reported another daily record of deaths on Wednesday, while Germany saw its biggest rise in fatalities since the pandemic began as Chancellor Angela Merkel hinted a hard lockdown will remain in force longer than planned. While vaccines have been developed, curbing some haven demand, challenges remain in immunising populations. “The confluence of an ever-supportive Fed and the greenback trading softer has been the wind beneath the wings for gold,” although the 50-day moving average is limiting further gains, said Jingyi Pan, a market strategist at IG Asia Pte. “Added US fiscal support and the continued weak US dollar bias would stay supportive for gold in a seasonally positive month.” Spot gold added 0.4% to $1,871.93 an ounce at 7:30 a.m. in London, after rising 0.6% on Wednesday. The precious metal is 23% higher this year after hitting a record above $2,075 in August. Silver advanced 1.3%, platinum gained 1.4% and palladium rose 0.7%. The Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index fell 0.4% to the lowest since April 2018 and is on course for the eighth monthly drop in nine. In the US, Congressional leaders are still haggling over the final details of nearly $900 billion in coronavirus aid as staffers try to write the legislative language needed for House and Senate votes this week. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said that he thinks “we’re gonna get there.”