Register here. This webinar will focus on the importance of rail in South Africa’s economic development, unpacking misconceptions regarding local content in the rail sector, as well as how the industry is tackling these hurdles and highlighting its commitment to the country. The webinar will be moderated by Moneyweb journalist Ciaran Ryan, who will be speaking with: Discussion topics: This webinar is free to attend and will take place on Monday, December 14 at 11h00. You can register here. More on the guests: With over 15 years of professional experience, Makololo has been a proven business partner for government agencies and state-owned companies in South Africa. She has held various roles and directorships with increasing responsibility over the years. Prior to being appointed MD of Bombardier Transportation for South Africa, she managed key leadership positions including as acting deputy director general for the energy business at the Department of Public Enterprises. Bombardier Transportation announced Makololo’s appointment as MD for South Africa in September 2020. In this significant leadership role, she is responsible for the company’s strategy development and deployment in the country, with sustainable customer and partner relationships as priorities. Dlamini joined the Pamodzi Group in 2003, after serving her articles with Ernst & Young and qualifying as a Chartered Accountant. She also underwent the Strategic Leadership programme from GIBS, through an AWCA sponsorship. She is currently serving as the CEO for Pamodzi Unique Engineering and has served on various boards and audit committees in the mining, information technology and food sector. She also serves as a board member for the Pamodzi Group. Dlamini strives to empower women and youth through mentorships, internships, learnerships and other skills-development programmes within the engineering and finance fields, and is a true champion for transformation. Her passion for transformation is driven by past experiences as a young board member in a male-dominant environment, where facilities did not cater for women. Her vision is to harness the power of young and inquisitive minds by creating an enabling environment for innovation, in growing the company and contributing to the re-industrialisation of the country. Naidoo-Morar is an Admitted Attorney of the High Court of South Africa. She holds an LLB and LLM (Environmental & Media Law) from the University of Witwatersrand, and has completed higher certificate courses in energy law and in prospecting & mining law from the Mandela Institute at the University of the Witwatersrand.