Asian stocks slipped Thursday after US technology giants dragged Wall Street benchmarks down amid dimming prospects for fresh stimulus. Treasury yields ticked lower. Stocks saw modest declines across the region, though Chinese equities edged higher. S&P 500 futures were little changed after the gauge slid from a record, and the Nasdaq 100 had its biggest slump in a month. Facebook Inc. sank after being sued by US antitrust officials, while Tesla tumbled as JPMorgan Chase & Co. called it “dramatically” overvalued. The dollar was steady and the pound fell amid a stalemate in Brexit negotiations. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Talks between UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson and European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen ended without a breakthrough on Wednesday night as large gaps remain between the two sides. They agreed to continue talks over the next few days. Meantime, iron ore futures jumped to more than $150 a ton, while crude oil edged higher.  Equities are coming under pressure as a US stimulus deal remains elusive amid the most-intense negotiations over a Covid-19 package since Election Day. The Democratic and Republican lawmakers working on a relief plan delivered a more-detailed summary of their proposal, but haven’t yet resolved the deadlock over a business liability shield as well as aid to state and local governments. “The idea here is that you’re not going to see a huge stimulus package,” Matt Brill, senior portfolio manager at Invesco, said on Bloomberg TV. “You are probably going to get something done, but it’s probably not going to be enough to put a lot of pressure on rates overall.” Later Thursday comes the European Central Bank policy decision and a press briefing from President Christine Lagarde. Economists widely expect the central bank to increase and extend its pandemic bond-buying program. Here are some key events coming up: These are some of the main moves in markets: