Asian equities climbed after a fresh record for their US counterparts, as hopes for a stimulus deal tempered concern about a surge in coronavirus cases. The dollar slipped with Treasuries. Stocks rose across the region with the exception of Chinese shares which fluctuated after weak consumer price data. S&P 500 futures ticked up after the benchmark closed at an all-time high and European contracts pointed to gains. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin presented a new $916 billion Covid-19 relief proposal to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, who hailed progress in the negotiations though deemed parts of the plan as “unacceptable.” Earlier, the Nasdaq 100 advanced for a 10th straight day, the longest rally in about a year. Benchmark Treasury yields edged up to 0.94%. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Elsewhere, the offshore yuan climbed past 6.5 per dollar for the first time since 2018, while the pound pared declines after the UK dropped controversial parts of an internal bill that would have given it the power to unilaterally override the Brexit divorce treaty. Oil fluctuated. Pfizer Inc. jumped as US regulators gave early indications they may grant emergency-use authorisation to its vaccine. With time running short the year-end break approaches, just as US Covid-19 cases surpass 15 million, investors remain hopeful a stimulus deal can be struck. Democrats have opposed Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s insistence on giving employers a shield from lawmakers, while he has been among Republicans blasting Democratic demands for assistance to state and local authorities as a bailout. Meantime, machinery orders in Japan jumped at the fastest pace in more than a decade, adding to signs that the global economy is continuing to recover from the pandemic. Chinese consumer prices declined for the first time since 2009. The opportunities are “in equities and credit, so we are overweight, we are risk on,” Richard Lacaille, global chief investment officer at State Street Global Advisors, said on Bloomberg TV. “We know that we will be tested again next year in terms of Covid and elsewhere.” Here are some key events coming up: Here are the main moves in markets: