Delta Property Fund’s listing on the JSE has been suspended with immediate effect, the JSE announced in a Sens statement on Tuesday. The move comes in the wake of Delta becoming the latest JSE-listed firm to be rocked by an accounting scandal, which has seen the property counter withdraw its annual financial statements (AFS) for its 2020 financial year to the end of February. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Read:
Delta’s former execs ‘categorically deny’ any wrongdoings
Delta forensic investigation reveals R46m fraud
Delta rocked by forensic probe into former executives Delta withdrawing its 2020 financial results follows a forensic investigation implicating senior former executives in “unsubstantiated payments, procurement irregularities and other unethical business dealings” totalling some R46 million. In a general Sens statement titled ‘Delta Property Fund Limited – Suspension of listing’, the bourse noted that the “announcement has been placed by the JSE in the interest of shareholders”. Delta itself is yet to comment or issue a Sens statement on the suspension. “The company [Delta] has withdrawn its AFS for the period ended 29 February 2020, as announced on 9 December 2020. Since the issuer has withdrawn its AFS reliance can no longer be placed on the published AFS,” the JSE said in its statement on Tuesday. “The JSE, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1.6 and 1.7 of the JSE Listings Requirements and Section 12(2) of the Financial Markets Act No. 19 of 2012, has therefore suspended the listing of this company’s securities with immediate effect.” Following Delta’s new management revealing highlights of a forensic report last week, the group’s former executives – including founding CEO Sandile Nomvete, former CFO Shaneel Maharaj and former COO Otis Tshabalala – issued a statement last Friday “categorically denying” allegations of fraud or procurement irregularities during their tenure at the group.