Emerging markets are closing in on the final phase of 2020 with investors anticipating further stimulus while keeping a close eye on the rollout of vaccination programs. Continued support from central banks and optimism that coronavirus vaccine developments will sustain a global economic recovery next year have fueled a rush to riskier assets, sending gauges of developing-nation stocks, currencies and bonds to six straight weeks of gains. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. While at least 10 central banks in developing economies are scheduled to set monetary policy this week, none will be as closely watched as the Federal Reserve. The suspense centers on whether the US central bank will adjust its bond-buying program or alter its guidance for future purchases. “Policy makers look poised to continue to support the recovery with fiscal action, and given persistently low inflation, we think central banks will keep policy rates low for years,” said Madison Faller, a London-based global investments strategist at J.P. Morgan Private Bank. “Such policy support will continue to drive investment outcomes and underlines our view that risk assets have room to run from here. A modestly weakening dollar has also led us to consider beneficiaries like emerging markets.” Mexico became the first in Latin America to join the UK, Canada and the US as countries that have granted emergency use of the Pfizer vaccine. Egypt said it will start vaccinating after it took delivery of the first shipments of the Chinese-made Sinopharm Group Co.’s vaccine late last week. Economic data will likewise serve as a guide on the progress of the global recovery. China will release a slew of economic data Tuesday that’s likely to show a continued rebound from the pandemic.