South Africa’s headline consumer price inflation slowed to 3.2% year-on-year in November from 3.3% in October, data from Statistics South Africa showed on Wednesday. On a month-on-month basis, the CPI was at flat at 0.0% in November from 0.3% in the previous month. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Core inflation, which excludes prices of food, non-alcoholic beverages, fuel and energy, fell to 3.3% year-on-year in November compared with a rate of 3.4% in October. On a month-on-month basis core inflation was also flat at 0.0% from 0.2% previously. Nedbank’s Group Economic Unit said the inflation numbers, while softer, point to the beginnings of some price pressure in certain categories, particularly food. “This might reflect some normalisation in prices as the impact of the strict lockdown slowly reverses, but food prices are the single biggest inflation category and any sharp price movements in this category can move the inflation needle markedly. Fuel prices are still subdued however and should dampen the extent of any price increases.” The bank unit expects inflation to remain around 3% for the remainder of the year and to average 3.3% for 2020, “hovering well below the Reserve Bank’s 4.5% target for at least a year.” “This benign inflation outlook, together with a poor growth outlook, would ordinarily mean more rate easing, but this is unlikely to be the case as the Reserve Bank has probably stimulated the economy enough with the series of rate cuts earlier this year. For this reason, we believe that the repo rate will remain unchanged for much of 2021.”