Most Asian stocks climbed Thursday and the pound advanced as an outline of the post-Brexit trade deal appeared to soothe investor nerves heading into the Christmas holiday period. Shares rose in Japan and in Australia, where trading ended early for the holidays. South Korean equities outperformed. US equity futures edged up after the S&P 500 finished on Wednesday just 0.1% higher. The Nasdaq Composite and Russell 2000 indexes set intraday records. Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. sank more than 8% in Hong Kong after China kicked off an investigation into alleged monopolistic practices at the tech giant. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Treasuries were steady after the gap between 5- and 30-year yields widened Wednesday to a four-year high. Volumes were subdued in many countries on Thursday. All derivatives trading is shut on Eurex and most equity markets will be closed Friday for Christmas Day.  The UK and the European Union are on the verge of unveiling a historic post-Brexit trade accord as negotiators work through the night to put the finishing touches on the pact. An announcement is expected Thursday morning in Europe. Investors, meanwhile, are looking past President Donald Trump’s demand for changes to US pandemic relief, expecting that stimulus spending will come sooner or later. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi seized on Trump’s call for larger individual checks and said the House would try to pass this additional measure during a pro forma session on Thursday. “Right now we have a lot of animal spirits surging into year end,” Michael Purves, founder and CEO at Tallbacken Capital Advisors, said on Bloomberg TV. “As constructive as I am on markets in the broader term, I do expect there will be a hangover of sorts to process this over-extension some time later this winter.” Pfizer Inc. and BioNTech SE agreed to double the supply of their Covid-19 vaccine to the US In the UK, Prime Minister Boris Johnson imposed tougher restrictions across a swath of England as authorities try to rein in a strain of coronavirus that’s spreading quickly. Here are the main moves in markets: