In the blink of an eye Christmas will be on your doorstep. And, are you certain that you are financially prepared for it? There are various costs involved when it comes to silly season festivities. To name but a few – travel, accommodation, pocket money, gifts, activities – and perhaps the biggest part of your expenditures – grocery costs. It is quite a mouthful, is it not? Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. It is, therefore, time to be proactive in the weeks/months prior Christmas. There is undeniably still time to make sure you are financially ready to get through the festive season. And, remember, the last thing you should do is consider making more debt. Here are a few tips to get your planning and preparations going so long. These tips (together with your own keeping-it-frugal list) can help you to have yourself (and your pocket) a rand-wise Christmas this year: Food and groceries It is most likely that you and other South African consumers are still feeling the effect of the Covid-19 challenges on your pocket. Groceries are very expensive, but there are a few things that you can do to not break the bank when it comes to meal planning this Christmas:  Fuel and travel Recent and continuing fuel hikes can surely make you think twice about travelling but, in many cases, – what can you do when you, unfortunately, have to travel from point A to point B? Oberholzer recommends the following: Gifts and ornaments Presents and decorations should not cost an arm and a leg. Remember – creativity goes a long fiscal way: Although the above tips are merely a drop-in-the-bucket, don’t you think it is now the time to get your own, personalised Christmas-action plan going? If you pre-plan your 2020 Christmas well, you will not only ease your pocket and nerves, but also set forth many more rand-wise (and minimum-debt) future Christmases to come. Carla Oberholzer is a debt advisor and spokesperson for DebtSafe.