The forced sale by Sasol, of a 50% stake in its newly-completed Lake Charles Chemicals Project (LCCP) base chemicals plant in the US attracted transaction expenses of over half a billion rand. This is according to the circular published ahead of the end-November shareholder vote on the sale. The vote was necessary, as the deal was defined as a category one transaction by the JSE (due to the collapse in Sasol’s share price, which meant the roughly R30-billion deal equated to more than half of the group’s market capitalisation when it was announced). Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The petrochemicals giant was forced into the sale as part of its efforts to deleverage its stretched balance sheet. LyondellBasell, a global chemicals and plastics producer, will purchase 50% of the LCCP base chemicals plant for $2 billion. It will also operate the 50/50 joint venture (JV) going forward. Some estimates put the sale at a discount of anywhere from 25% to 40% of what (that portion of) the plant cost. In the circular, Sasol says the “disposal is a critical part of Sasol’s response plan to reduce debt, improve debt covenant compliance and enhance liquidity”. It adds: “As a result of the transaction, net debt, before lease liabilities, is expected to reduce materially from approximately $10 billion to approximately $8 billion, significantly improving Sasol’s financial position.” The deal – at the bottom of the cycle – did not come cheap. Sasol expects to pay more than R550 million in fees to an army of legal, financial and strategic advisors, accountants and consultants. Four entities will be paid in excess of 80% of these fees. Deloitte, in its role as “carve-out consultants” will be paid R160 million (or roughly $10 million). This seems excessive, but the transaction itself is complicated. Sasol is selling only a portion of the LCCP plant. It retains what it describes as the “performance chemicals” business at the site as well as the vacant land. The sale into the JV includes the new LCCP Cracker (which reached beneficial operation in August 2019), the low-density polyethylene (LDPE) plant (being commissioned following damage by an explosion earlier this year), the linear low-density polyethylene plant (LLDPE) completed in mid-2019, and “selected supporting utility, offsite and infrastructure units on the west side of the Lake Charles property”. Consultants to “carve out” this portion of the complex were necessary, as the JV will operate the LDPE and LLDPE plants using ethylene from both its ethane cracker as well as Sasol’s retained (original) ethane cracker plant. There is also a complex marketing and sales agreement (as both entities will share customers): Source: Sasol transaction circular BofA Securities will be paid around $9 million in its role as investment banker (“financial advisor”) on the sale. Three law firms will together be paid just under $7 million, with the bulk going to Latham & Watkins LLP in the US. Even the group of so-called “other advisors”, which includes professional communication advisors in the US and South Africa, as well as a real estate advisor, among others, will be paid a total of $1 million (around R16 million). Wincing amount… Astonishingly, Ince – which prepped and distributed the (electronic) transaction circular and ensured that statutory advertisements appeared where and when required – will be paid nearly R10 million for its work. Part of the problem for Sasol is that, given the transaction, most of these fees are being incurred in dollars ($34 million, according to Sasol’s disclosure). Aside from the transaction costs, Sasol also estimates a “once-off implementation cost” of R399 million (or $24 million). This means the entire transaction will ‘cost’ just under R1 billion. Recent rand strength will mean the ‘converted’ fees in rands will be slightly lower. But the proceeds and (majority of the) fees remain dollar-based. As a percentage of the $2 billion in gross proceeds from the sale, the once-off costs equate to 3%. Sasol, however, estimates net proceeds after all adjustments, an escrow amount and transaction and implementation costs to be $1.885 billion. It will use this to repay a $1 billion syndicated loan, with the remaining proceeds of $880 million put towards reducing its $3.9 billion revolving credit facility in the US. One wonders what the transaction fees have been for the other major asset sales thus far, chiefly the 16 air separation units at Secunda (to Air Liquide) and a 50% stake in Gemini HDPE (to Ineos). These transactions did not require circulars. However, transaction costs, implementation costs as well as other restructuring costs related to the group’s progress to its idea of ‘Future Sasol’ will likely be disclosed in the 2021 integrated report.