The pound declined as investors questioned how close Britain and the European Union really are to sealing a trade agreement. Sterling extended its drop after The Sun reported that UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson is ready to pull out of talks within hours. The two sides are still at odds over their longstanding disagreement over fishing. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The pound retreated as much as 1.3%, while government bonds advanced. Money market are now pricing in a 10-basis-point cut in interest rates by November 2021. That would lower borrowing costs to 0%. The FTSE 100 benchmark index, which has a negative correlation with the pound, was little changed, while the Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.5%.  Traders had speculated on a weekend deal, but pessimism is solidifying, with the relative cost of hedging a weaker sterling over the coming month staging its longest advance in 17 years. “At some point everyone has to say the risks are too high to hold any exposure with this yo-yo of optimism and pessimism,” said Jordan Rochester, a currency strategist at Nomura International Plc. “The risk now is that optimism turns to pessimism and we have to hedge for a no-deal Brexit.” Hopes that the EU and UK can reach a deal boosted the pound by nearly 8% against the dollar since June, with traders assuming that negotiators would reach a last-minute resolution after more than four years of Brexit drama. That sent the pound to a two-year high of $1.3539 on Friday. Sterling traded 1.3% lower as of 8:30 a.m. in London to $1.3271, and the yield on 10-year bonds fell six basis points to 0.29%.Traders are now getting jumpy. Many investors expect an agreement, which leaves the currency vulnerable to any setbacks that could undermine that assumption. The pound could rise 2% to 3% on a deal, but failure to reach agreement could see the currency drop as much as 8%, said Lee Hardman, currency analysts at MUFG. “We’d leave gilts well alone,” said John Wraith, head of UK And European rates strategy at UBS Group AG. “We try and filter out the noise and briefings, and still think both sides have a very strong incentive to reach a deal. That said, it will inevitably be very late in the process, and the sound and fury will continue to swirl in the meantime.”