South Africa’s main equities index rallied beyond the 60,000 points level for the first time since August 2018, benefiting from positive sentiment toward riskier assets as investors mulled speculation Washington lawmakers are edging closer to a US stimulus deal. The benchmark FTSE/JSE Africa All Share Index gained 1.5% to 60,353 at 10 a.m. in Johannesburg, with miners, banks and retailers prominent among gainers. South African markets were shut Wednesday for a public holiday. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership.  An index of mining stocks was 2% higher, with diversified giants BHP, up 2%, and Anglo American, rising 2.5%, leading the gains. Bank stocks climbed 1.7%, with FirstRand advancing 2.5%, Absa rising 3.9% and Standard Bank up 1.8% as the rand strengthened for a fourth day to a 10-month high against the dollar. The positive risk sentiment also boosted retailers, with an index of general retailers on a four-day winning streak, up 1.2%, and food and drug sellers rising 1.2%. Pharmacy-chain operator Clicks jumped as much as 12%, the most on record, before trading 2.7% higher. MTN was the biggest drag on the overall market, sliding 11% after Nigeria’s telecommunications regulator ordered mobile-phone users to link their devices to their national identity numbers, raising the prospect of millions of lines being blocked. Johannesburg-based MTN’s local unit is the biggest wireless operator in the West African country. South Africa’s benchmark stock index has risen 5.6% in 2020, rebounding almost 60% from the lows seen in March, but still lagging behind the 14% gain this year in its emerging-market peers. Globally, investors are awaiting developments on stimulus talks after months of deadlock amid signs the economic recovery is faltering. Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve strengthened its commitment to support the US economy, promising to maintain its massive asset purchase program until it sees “substantial further progress” in employment and inflation. Foreigners were net purchasers of South African stocks for an eighth day Tuesday, buying R629 million ($43 million) of shares, according to exchange operator JSE Ltd.