Vital trade and travel links between the UK and continental Europe slowly reopened after France eased border restrictions, but huge backlogs that could take days to clear led to tensions at Britain’s busiest port. Near Dover, police clashed with some truckers angry that they’ve been waiting since Saturday and are trying to get home for Christmas. Many are lined up for coronavirus tests that they need for passage into France. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. France cut off shipments from the port in southeast England on Sunday because of concern over a faster-spreading variant of Covid-19 that prompted the UK government to lock down London and surrounding areas. That heightened a sense of economic isolation in the UK as the high-stakes political drama of Brexit edged closer to its end-of-year deadline. Police officers speak with truck drivers at the Port of Dover Ltd. in Dover, UK, on Wednesday, December 23, 2020. The European Commission called on member states to reopen critical trade and passenger transport links to the UK while discouraging non-essential travel, a step toward ending the chaos at Britain’s busiest port. As port officials and ferry companies worked to get things moving on Wednesday, frustrated truckers demanded updates. Next to the protests, Polish driver Arturro Bojdal said he’d been stuck two miles from Dover since midnight on Sunday. He picked up his load in Southampton to deliver it in the Czech Republic. “First they said testing would start yesterday, then today. The police told us tests got stuck on the motorway,” he said. “There’s been free food — a cheeseburger with salad yesterday — but the toilets are full. They have no water. I’ve been sleeping in my cab with another driver. I just want to get home for Christmas.” Almost 3 000 trucks have been stuck in southeast England, lined up on the side of the highway and the tarmac of a local airport — a logjam that threatened the supply of some fresh food items in British supermarkets. While UK food and retail groups welcomed the decision to reopen Channel crossings, there was also a warning that some foods could remain in short supply. Drivers need to get tested and it will take time to clear the thousands of trucks backed up on roads leading to Dover. The Food and Drink Federation said it could be the New Year before normal operations resume. “It is essential that lorries get moving,” said Andrew Opie, Director of Food & Sustainability at the British Retail Consortium. “Until the backlog is cleared and supply chains return to normal, we anticipate issues with the availability of some fresh goods.” Given the backlog, the government is advising truckers not already in the port area to wait until the congestion is cleared. Speaking on Sky News, UK Communities Secretary Robert Jenrick said there were supply-chain issues, but “no material shortage of food” and people shouldn’t panic buy. Along with France, more than 40 countries restricted travel from the UK because of the new coronavirus variant. On Wednesday, the Nikkei reported that Japan will suspend all foreign arrivals from the UK while the Philippines will halt all flights from December 24 to December 31. India, Hong Kong and Singapore have implemented similar measures. The limited reopening of the UK-France border followed 48 hours of cross-Channel political bartering just as negotiations with the EU over a post-Brexit trade deal intensified. With less than 10 days to go before the UK’s transition period with the bloc ends, the upheaval gave a sampling of the potential pain Britain could face at its borders in 2021. The British military and National Health Service will establish multiple testing sites in Kent, the county where Dover is located, Sky News reported. The new travel restrictions requiring a negative virus result will apply until at least January 6, the French government said. For trucks stuck now, food lobby groups said priority must be given to perishable loads like seafood and other fresh foods. But given the scale of the logistical operation, port officials said that might not be possible, and the priority was just to get ferries loaded and clear the trucks. “During the course of 2019 we had a number of periods when we were facing a no-deal exit,” said Doug Bannister, chief executive of the Port of Dover. “We’ve been working on our plans but this is a rather unprecedented situation that’s evolved. We hope to get traffic moving at a good clip during the course of today.”