Most Asian stocks slipped with US and European futures Friday amid fresh US-China tensions and as lawmakers continued to wrangle over a federal-spending deal in Washington. The dollar pushed higher. Shares dipped across much of Asia Pacific on volumes below the recent average. Sentiment took a hit after Reuters reported the US is set to blacklist dozens of Chinese firms. S&P 500 futures pulled back after the index closed at a record high. A bipartisan US stimulus deal “appears to be close at hand,” Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said, but will probably require work over the weekend to get through Congress. Investors earlier took an unexpectedly large rise in jobless claims as a sign the two sides would be prodded toward an agreement. Treasury yields ticked lower. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Elsewhere, the yen retreated as the Bank of Japan maintained its main policy settings and extended its virus program by six months, saying it will take more action without hesitation if required. Oil edged back from the highest level since February. Bitcoin breached $23,000 for the first time. The pound fell as both sides in the Brexit negotiations played down expectations a deal will be reached.  With the clock ticking to renew pandemic aid, leaders in Washington are under pressure to resolve their differences after months of deadlock amid signs of a faltering economic recovery. The country continues to set records for virus infections and deaths, with more jurisdictions tightening lockdowns in a renewed threat to the economy. The stimulus package “ought to be a sufficient bridge,” Steven Wieting, global investment strategist at Citigroup Private Bank, said on Bloomberg TV. “That along with at this stage a preparedness for this Covid emergency and the fact that vaccines are ahead by mid-year, would certainly be sufficient to get us through this period of weakness.” Meanwhile, leaders from across Europe are isolating after coming into contact with French President Emmanuel Macron, who tested positive for the virus. Pfizer and US regulators are revising information for the company’s vaccine after rare allergic reactions. Moderna Inc.’s shot won backing from a panel of experts who advise US regulators. These are the main moves in markets: