Gold advanced as investors weighed the prospects for a US spending package and possibility of further action from the Federal Reserve at its last meeting of the year, against the progress on the roll-out of vaccines. A bipartisan group of lawmakers delivered details of a $908 billion relief package, splitting it into two parts in recognition of deep differences over state aid and a liability shield for employers. With Joe Biden now confirmed as president by the Electoral College, leaders in Congress need to find a way to get one or both parts through the House and Senate before the last of the relief provisions from earlier stimulus expire at the end of the year. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership.  Bullion’s path in recent weeks has been dominated by developments on vaccines and prolonged stimulus talks in the US, with prices set for the first quarterly loss since 2018. Still, the metal may get some support after the Fed meets Tuesday and Wednesday, with markets expecting fresh guidance on asset purchases. In addition, the haven may get a boost from fresh anti-virus curbs being rolled out in major economies including Germany and the UK. “Prices are looking vulnerable again but should once again be saved by the Fed,” said Edward Moya, senior market analyst at Oanda Corp. “Economic scarring will undoubtedly make it easier for the Fed to continue to provide more accommodation and that could make many traders want to jump back in.” Spot gold rose as much as 0.4% to $1,835.17 an ounce and was at $1,832.75 at 11:39 a.m. in Singapore, after a 0.7% drop on Monday. The precious metal remains about 20% higher this year after hitting a record in August. Silver climbed 0.8%, platinum added 0.1% and palladium advanced 0.3%. The Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index was flat after losing 0.2% Monday. The first Covid-19 shots were administered by US hospitals Monday, an initial step in a drive to immunise millions. At the same time, New York is headed toward a full shutdown if hospitalisations continue to rise, Governor Andrew Cuomo warned. Separately, London will be placed under England’s toughest curbs from Wednesday, the same day Germany starts a hard lockdown.