The full bench of the High Court, Gauteng Division, Pretoria, on December 7 declared unlawful and set aside the Public Protector’s report into the establishment of an investigative unit at the South African Revenue Service (Sars). Former deputy Sars commissioner Ivan Pillay and former Sars commissioner George (Oupa) Magashula had also submitted review applications to set aside the Public Protector’s report, and the remedial action ordered by the Public Protector (PP). The applications were separately dealt with, but there was “significant overlap in the evidence pertaining to the Public Protector’s findings” against them. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Former Sars executive Johann van Loggerenberg deposed an affidavit to Pillay’s affidavit. The court noted that “despite communication from Mr Van Loggerenberg’s attorneys, the Public Protector made no attempt to contact him or his attorneys”. It said: “It is important to note that no other party in these proceedings, including the Public Protector and the EFF, has sought to respond at all to what Mr Van Loggerenberg testified to in the affidavit deposed to by him. What he says thus stands entirely uncontradicted and unchallenged.” Costs After considering all the arguments and coming to its conclusion, the court ordered the PP and Advocate Busisiwe Mkhwebane in her personal capacity, to jointly and severally pay the costs of Public Enterprises Minister (and former Sars commissioner) Pravin Gordhan, Pillay, and Magashula, on the scale between attorney and client, including the costs of two counsel where applicable. Mkhwebane is ordered to pay the costs personally limited to 15% of those costs. Public Protector failed in exercising her duties The court found that the Public Protector had failed in the exercise of her duties and had displayed bias towards Gordhan and Pillay, based on the following reasons: Read: Public Protector takes another costly punch (Jul 2019) Conclusion The court concluded that: Industry comments In a media statement issued on Monday in response to the ruling, Sars said: “It is a seminal judgment that brings necessary closure to the unfortunate distracting narrative surrounding the establishment and functioning of the Sars High Risk Investigation Unit. Moreover, it confirms Sars’s powers to gather intelligence relating to tax offences.” Werksmans Attorneys stated: “The court has confirmed what our clients have always contended: the Sars investigative unit was established lawfully, successfully pursued the national interest and was never covert or ‘rogue’ … “More than that, the court found that the Public Protector acted irrationally, unlawfully and incorrigibly,” it added. “Her conduct, the court finds, has stained the institution that she heads – an institution of utmost constitutional importance and one that most South Africans looked up to lead the fight against corruption and protect the rights of ordinary citizens. The Public Protector’s conduct – which the judgment describes as ‘reprehensible’, ‘manifestly bias’ towards our clients and ‘irrational’ – is unfortunate and will lead to a further erosion of public trust in important institutions that must strengthen our democratic development.” Read: The public protector is inept and has failed the people of SA (Aug 2019)