South Africa’s banking regulator isn’t even ready to consider withdrawing its advice that no dividend payouts be made, unlike counterparts in Europe, as a second coronavirus wave stirs uncertainty over the economy’s outlook. While the Bank of England last week offered UK lenders a path to normality and European Central Bank officials prepare to make a decision this week on possibly allowing capital-flush firms to make payouts, South Africa has taken a more hands off approach. Overseers have left it to the banks themselves to make the call. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. “We have had several banks approach us and our response is: ‘please don’t come to us, we aren’t interested in the merits of the case,’” Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank and chief executive officer of the Prudential Authority Kuben Naidoo said by phone. “It is the board’s choice.” If it were to give “a soft yes or no” to the banks, then the watchdog may as well have issued a directive, he said. The banks are divided over which way they’ll go. Investec Group paid an interim dividend with cash received from an asset manager. Absa has ruled out the likelihood, while Standard Bank and FirstRand, the continent’s largest lenders, have surplus capital that could go to shareholders. “We would like banks to pay dividends and bonuses at some point, but we are not yet sure where we are with the Covid crisis,” Naidoo said. “It is true that the credit loss numbers are coming down. We just want a few more data points before we are sure we are out of the woods.” Profits have nosedived after banks raised provisions to manage doubtful debts and extended relief to customers hit by restrictions to contain the coronavirus. While the continent’s most industrialised economy emerged from a recession in the third quarter, output is still down from a year ago. Dividends aren’t the only things on the agenda. The outlook for the nation’s lenders from Standard Bank to Capitec is even more hazy after South Africa’s Health Ministry declared a second wave of coronavirus infections last week. Here are the views from some analysts on dividends, the economy and the virus: Patrice Rassou, chief investment officer at Ashburton Investments: David Shapiro, deputy chairman at Sasfin Securities: Neelash Hansjee, portfolio manager at Old Mutual Investment Group: Craig Metherell, equity analyst at Denker Capital: