South Africa came out of its longest recession in 28 years as the economy rebounded more than projected in the third quarter when most of the curbs to contain the spread of the coronavirus were eased. Gross domestic product expanded an annualised 66.1% in the three months through September from the previous quarter, following a revised 51.7% decline in the three months through June, Statistics South Africa said Tuesday in the capital, Pretoria. That’s the strongest growth since at least 1990 and the first positive number after four quarters of contraction. The median estimate of 14 economists in a Bloomberg survey was for a 54.4% increase in output. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
 To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. On a non-annualised basis, the economy expanded 13.5% from the previous quarter. Compared with the same period last year, GDP contracted by 6%, the second straight quarter of decline. The rebound in the quarterly figure was expected as output resumed in Africa’s most-industrialised economy after most activity was shuttered for much of the second quarter due to a strict nationwide lockdown. The recovery remains vulnerable, with power shortages and slow structural reforms likely to weigh on sentiment. The central bank projects GDP will shrink 8% this year and expand by 3.5% in 2021. Rand leaps Peregrine Treasury Solutions executive director Bianca Botes said while the 66.1% figure is “clearly a base-effect bounce, and the strongest quarterly pace of expansion that SA has seen,” it has been well received by the market which was expecting lesser growth. “The rand leapt nearly 1%, trading as low as R15.07/$ in the runup to the announcement, and is currently changing hands slightly firmer at R15.06/$,” she added.