The top young talent in the field of economics are cautiously optimistic about the potential for the South African economy to recover. This has emerged from essays submitted for the 48th annual Nedbank and Old Mutual Budget Speech Competition, which is open to undergraduates and postgraduates in the field of economics. The leaders of tomorrow have called on Finance Minister Tito Mboweni to act decisively in his budget speech, imploring the government to take the necessary action to repair the country’s purse. Their most ardent recommendation: root out corruption by any means necessary. For the finalists, this is the number one barrier to attracting investment and fostering economic growth. In fact, all entrants cited this as a major obstacle to creating a supportive business environment and securing the stability required to allow for the effective implementation of macroeconomic policies. Understandable pessimism, but optimism too Tasked with evaluating President Cyril Ramaphosa’s economic stimulus package, jobs summit initiative and bold $100 billion investment target, participants were understandably pessimistic about the possibility of short- to medium-term gains. Citing government inefficiency, corruption and the lack of a skilled workforce, all the finalists agreed that these reforms are unlikely to meet their goals unless the problems at the root of the economic turmoil are addressed. These outstanding young thinkers remind us not to overlook the reasons for optimism in these troubled times. Most highlighted South Africa’s robust financial services and banking sector as a key asset in attracting investment. The independence of the South African Reserve Bank and our stable monetary policy were also frequently mentioned as a draw for investors. Indeed, South Africa boasts some of the most sophisticated and sound financial institutions in the world. Gateway appeal On the whole, the finalists see the country’s strong regional, continental and global trade networks – particularly its role as a gateway into emerging African markets – as a key factor in favour of attracting investment. The views they expressed echo the calls from broader society for decisiveness and action. Hopefully these views are not falling on deaf ears. Other findings include: Their ideas aside, every year, these bright young minds remind us that we have a whole new generation of talented and innovative leaders in our country eager to make a difference. Just listening to the enthusiasm with which they debate opportunities and ideas fills me with hope and optimism for the future. The results of the competition will be announced later in February. Farhad Sader is MD of Old Mutual Wealth.