South Africa plans to reduce corporate taxes and increase the exemption on foreign income earned by expatriates in a bid to attract investments and stem the emigration of high-earning citizens as revenue collections falter. Read: Government increases tax-free cap on foreign income These charts show the debt and deficit woes in SA’s budget Sluggish economic growth has led to tax revenue undershooting estimates, with the shortfall forecast at R63.3 billion for the year ending March 31, the National Treasury said in the Budget Review Wednesday. That’s R10.8 billion more than the gap forecast in October. The government’s efforts to bolster revenue by raising levies on personal income, dividends, capital gains and value-added tax over the past five years have failed to arrest the debt trajectory, the Treasury said. “Higher levels of economic growth are required for further tax increases to be effective in consolidating the public finances or financing additional expenditure.” South Africa plans to reduce its corporate-income tax rate of 28% over the medium term to boost the country’s competitiveness as an investment destination among emerging markets, while dissuading companies from “profit shifting,” the Treasury said. Corporate taxes account for 16% of government revenue. Read: Tax reprieve for South Africans in 2020 “The minister has every intent not to do the easier thing and the politically expedient thing to just raise taxes,” South African Revenue Service Commissioner Edward Kieswetter said in an interview. Broadening the tax base and addressing “criminal activities and aggressive tax planning by companies would create the headroom to reduce corporate-income tax,” he said. The exemption threshold on foreign income earned by South African taxpayers will be lifted to R1.25 million from the planned R1 million from March 1. While the levy has raised concerns about high-earners ending their local tax-residency status, Kieswetter said that outflows linked to foreign investment allowances are declining. Outflows of R57 billion in 2017 have fallen to under R20 billion for the tax year to date, he said. It won’t increase direct taxes on individuals, rolling back on a 2019 pledge to aid fiscal consolidation by collecting R10 billion in additional revenue. It plans to raise R1.58 billion in fiscal 2020-21. Read: Greater focus on rebuilding Sars While the government considered proposing tax increases, it decided against it due to “the weakness in the economy,” the Treasury said. Key tax proposals: © 2020 Bloomberg L.P.