Isuzu Motors South Africa has started supplying knocked down (KD) Isuzu D-Max pick-up kits from Port Elizabeth for assembly at its Isuzu manufacturing facility in Kenya. In so doing, it is following the lead taken by many other SA-based vehicle manufacturers – including Nissan, Volkswagen, Ford and Toyota – in establishing assembly operations with joint venture partners in some sub-Saharan African countries. Michael Sacke, CEO and MD of Isuzu Motors SA, said on Tuesday that Isuzu’s initiative in Kenya represents the first intra-continental regional trade exchange of its kind for Isuzu on the continent. He added that it is also aligned to Isuzu’s strategy for its South African vehicle assembly plant to serve as a hub for growing its overall volumes in sub-Saharan Africa. “The Kenya KD project is an important step in achieving our growth strategy, which is geared at strengthening our presence in key sub-Saharan Africa markets through a combination of tactical SKD [semi knocked down] initiatives as well as various initiatives to strengthen our dealer distribution network,” he said. The East African operation previously focused only on truck and bus assembly operations while fully importing light commercial vehicles from South Africa. Azar Jammine, chief economist at Econometrix, said there is no question that South Africa’s vehicle market is surviving more and more because of exports. Read: Car exports are racing to a record in South Africa “The whole vehicle market internationally has become very global and in smaller countries like South Africa, to have an automotive industry on its own without worrying about the rest of the world is not viable anymore. “So we have no option. If we want to have an automotive industry here, it has to be exported-orientated,” he said. Isuzu is a leading brand in East African markets and last year secured a 44.5% share of the Kenyan new vehicle market. Sacke said Isuzu’s market strength in East Africa can be attributed to the vehicles’ overall performance, reliability and customer satisfaction. “We have put this project together in record time and anticipate that it will result in a win-win for both South Africa and Kenya. “Some of the vehicle kits have already arrived in Kenya and the Kenyan team received comprehensive training in Port Elizabeth late last year in preparation for actual operations,” he said. Exports aid job retention in SA The vehicle kits, which are exported from the Port of Ngqura, provide additional volume at the port while ensuring job retention at Isuzu’s South African plant, he said. Sacke said volumes have been projected at 1 300 vehicles a year to Kenya through this programme, but it is expected that this will increase in the medium to long term. Rita Kavashe, MD of Isuzu East Africa, welcomed the decision to import the kits kits, adding the KD programme gives the Kenyan operation more flexibility and an opportunity to remain competitive. “Our import tariffs are lower on the KD kits, we create employment and we positively influence employee and customer morale by assembling the Isuzu D-Max locally,” she said. Isuzu Motors Limited, the majority shareholder of Isuzu East Africa, said it regarded the opportunities in Africa, based on infrastructural investment, to be significant.