 NOMPU SIZIBA: The National Budget is around the corner, with Finance Minister Tito Mboweni set to deliver his speech on Wednesday, February 26. Of course, he’ll be walking a tightrope as he works out how he’s going to cut government expenditure on the one side, while looking to raise much-needed revenue on the other. So what can we expect, and what ideally should the finance minister announce within the constraints he’s operating in? Well, to share his view on things, I’m joined on the line by Peter Worthington, an economist at Absa. Thanks very much, Peter, for joining us. So what’s your expectation around where National Treasury can extract revenues, apart from the usual suspects of sin taxes? PETER WORTHINGTON: Yes, look, I think we’re definitely going to get some recourse to what is called the stealth tax, which is basically a form of personal income tax, although it’s kind of a little subtle, because it’s derived from not adjusting the tax bracket to offset the effects of inflation. So we’re going to get some stealth tax – non-adjustment of tax brackets. We’ve also made a fairly bold call that Minister Mboweni is going to hike the VAT rate. It would be politically contentious. It is the right thing to do economically, because it’s the one tax that can raise a sizeable chunk of money without distorting economic activity and damaging the tax base. But it’s not a foregone conclusion that he’s going to do that. We have that call, but I’m very curious to see whether he delivers on that. NOMPU SIZIBA: Apart from that, any other areas? We have the carbon tax. Does he have much room to manoeuvre on there, for example? PETER WORTHINGTON: Not really, no. I think the trajectory of the carbon tax is pretty laid out. There’s not a lot to be gained by upping the ante on the burden on industry at this moment, given the trouble the South African in industry is in, in the low growth rate. So I think you were right in your opening comments, to say there’ll be some recourse to sin taxes. And then no doubt Treasury will have one or two other things up their sleeves, but those other things are going to be small. But maybe collectively they can generate something. I will say that I’m quite optimistic about the prospects for improved tax elasticity; in other words, the amount of tax that you can generate from a given quantum of GDP growth as the government goes forward with efforts to rehabilitate Sars. In the mid-term budget (in October) Treasury were very conservative about the tax elasticity assumption, but Sars got an additional R1.3 billion and the leadership is really trying to modernise and rehabilitate the institution. So I’m hopeful we get something on better tax elasticity as well. NOMPU SIZIBA: So when it comes to expenditure, I think the finance minister talked about cutting expenditure by R150 billion over three years in the mid-term budget – you’ll correct me if I’m wrong. But, whatever he does, whatever the quantum, where is he going to have to cut? PETER WORTHINGTON: That is a very tricky question. It’s very difficult to cut expenditure in South Africa without damaging service delivery. And we’ve actually already had quite significant cuts in expenditure to make room for the Eskom bailout. Unless we’ve got an instrument to deal with public sector wages in this budget, we’re not going to see really big expenditure cuts coming through in this budget, because more than half the budgetary expenditure is public-sector compensation, social grants, or interest on the debt. And so I think that the expenditure cuts for this year at least are going to be pretty moderate. But everyone will be looking to see what he is pencilling in for the outer years of the three-year planning horizon on this critical issue of public-sector compensation. NOMPU SIZIBA: Yes. As you say, there’s such a proportion of government spending that’s going on the public sector wages and on servicing debt, whatever happens he can’t really afford to scrimp on the essentials – like social security, education, police and security, and so on. PETER WORTHINGTON: That’s right. As for room for expenditure cuts without some kind of agreement with the public-sector unions on some form of pay containment, I don’t think we’re ever going to get a nominal pay freeze. But let’s say a pay deal which is either inflation(-related) or something just below inflation. That is actually critical for containing expenditure over the medium term. But we’re in the middle of a multi-year pay deal right now, and the unions have indicated that they view the current pay deal as sacrosanct. And so I don’t think we really have a prospect of, sort of a major, major on that front until the current pay deal comes up for renegotiation –  that is, a new pay deal starting in April of 2021. NOMPU SIZIBA: But the problem is, and we know it, our state-owned enterprises, particularly Eskom, we’ve had to shell out a lot of money as South Africa Inc towards that particular utility, and yet these entities really need to be operating under their own steam without the taxpayers’ assistance. But we keep on assisting, and it doesn’t look as though there’s a light at the end of the tunnel yet. PETER WORTHINGTON: It’s a really big question. One of the things I’m most curious to see in the budget is the stats for public-sector enterprises, because of course if you look at, for example, South African Airways, they’re going to need more money than they have been given to date, because once they started cancelling flights bookings dried up. And so their need for bailout funding, or some kind of funding, has risen if they’re not generating those revenues from ticket sales. So that is one of the very key parts of the budget going forward. We know that Minister Mboweni is somewhat at odds with his colleagues and cabinet, and within the party at large, about the future of state-owned enterprises. Let’s see how that pans out on Wednesday. NOMPU SIZIBA: Yes. Of course it’s critical for an economy to invest in itself in order for us to see growth down the line. The finance minister has very little room to manoeuvre, and yet infrastructure spending is so critical, never mind the fact that we need to be able to also maintain the infrastructure that we already have. What are your expectations in that regard? PETER WORTHINGTON: Well, another area which is not sort of normally part of the budget, but which I think will feature heavily in this one, is the Treasury’s plan for growth-boosting structural reforms. And at the end of the day those reforms are sort of aimed at creating the right operating environment for business, such that business becomes more confident and starts to spend off its balance sheet, because it’s the only sector that really has a lot of room on the balance sheet to spend, invest, and boost the productive side of the economy. I think those reforms the Treasury first outlined in a paper in August are going to be an important aspect of the budget. I’m curious to see what Minister Mboweni has to say about them. NOMPU SIZIBA: All right, we’re going to leave it there, Peter. Thank you so much for your insights and we’ll see what he has to say on Wednesday.