Financial services provider Ecsponent says it has shifted its strategic focus from both private equity investments and financial services to being almost exclusively a private equity investment business. It has also warned shareholders that it cannot honour its preference share obligations and to expect an interim loss for 2019. In 2019 it announced the conversion of a “material amount of its business-to-business interest-bearing loans into the underlying equity investments” including a significant increase in the equity investment in MyBucks SA. In a Sens it said as of February 11, 2020, the remaining loan book, after conversions into equity and impairments, will approximate R61 million. As such it won’t consider the issue of its current classes of preference shares or notes an appropriate form of funding anymore and will consider alternative forms of funding going forward. “The Board is currently assessing various options pursuant to a capital restructure of its preferences shares and/or alternative forms of funding, specifically also taking into account the potential conversion of preference shares into ordinary shares in the event of default in accordance with the terms of the preference shares. The Board is also considering the disposal of certain non-core assets in order to deleverage the Group’s balance sheet,” it added. Ecsponent’s board does not expect the group to be in a position to settle its obligations, “in particular in relation to the redemption of the preference share obligations due in March 2020 and its ongoing dividend payment obligations on its various classes of preference shares”, given the funding currently available. As such it expects “a default event to occur on its March redemption obligation and ongoing dividend obligations”. The following redemption amounts are due for payment in March: *       Class A, Series 2 in an amount of R24 694 600; *       Class B, Series 2 in an amount of R46 166 000; and *       Class C, Series 2 in an amount of R117 517 000. Ecsponent is investigating converting further loans in its business-to-business loan book into equity investments. It said its current equity portfolio is estimated to require the next three to five years for its “significant underlying value” to fully materialise. The board expects an interim loss for the period ended December 2019. The results are due on March 30. A further trading statement will be in due course. Shareholders are warned to exercise caution in dealing in the company’s shares for now. Its shares are down -38.46% from the past six months, to R0.08.