The Trump administration has criticised foreign governments’ efforts to reduce drug prices in a new report, even as the president and Congress consider measures of their own to control the cost of medicines in the US. The report published Thursday by the White House Council of Economic Advisers (CEA) argues that coordinated drug-purchasing efforts in other countries, often by government-run programmes, result in lower drug costs compared to the US. The report describes the practice as “free-riding.” The CEA report strongly echoes arguments of the pharmaceutical industry. It claims that lower drug spending globally erodes the resources available for researchers to develop new drugs. The analysis shows that other industrialised countries spend much less than the US on drugs, and argues that a truly free market would see them all pay more – rather than the US paying less. The report was published as the US considers policies that would essentially copy those countries. President Donald Trump called for bipartisan legislation to cut drug prices in his State of the Union speech last week – a move that, if the logic of the White House’s report is followed, would reduce funding for research and breakthroughs. Trump is also weighing whether to index certain US drug prices to those of other nations, many of which are criticised in Thursday’s report as “free-riders.” Representatives for the drug industry’s largest trade organizations, the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America and the Biotechnology Innovation Organization, didn’t immediately return requests for comment. “This report looks like it’s about increasing pharma revenue – it’s certainly not about lowering prices for Americans,” said Michael Rea, the founder and chief executive of RX Savings Solutions, which collects drug-pricing data to help large employers get better deals on medications. “Are you trying to lower prices or beef up pharma profits? This is disingenuous as to what the real motives are.” Health care looms as a vulnerability for Trump in his 2020 re-election. Democrats have criticised him for pushing to overturn Obamacare – and its protections for people with illnesses and health conditions that would otherwise cause them difficulty obtaining insurance – without specifying an alternative. US health care costs are meanwhile the highest in the world, and Trump has struggled to arrive at policies to constrain them. Thursday’s CEA report, in chart after chart, notes that other countries pay much less for pharmaceuticals and that the US is an outlier. The UK, for instance, spends 34% of the price paid in the US for the top 200 selling patented drugs that CEA researchers examined. Canada pays 35% of US prices, France 42% and Germany 43%, the report says. “US patients and taxpayers have largely financed global revenue for the biopharmaceutical industry,” the report says, while also noting the US is a leader in pharmaceutical research and development. “Stringent government underpricing in foreign countries has substantially increased foreign free-riding on the United States.” The report criticises “monopsonistic purchasing arrangements” – or purchasing power – of government-run drug plans for sapping the coffers of US drug researchers. “Lower prices obtained by single-payer systems have the effect of undermining the original purpose of patent policy for prescription drugs: creating a strong financial incentive for innovative R&D,” the report says. “Drug prices are lower in other countries because those countries negotiate prices – we are the only first-world country that doesn’t provide universal health care and the only country that doesn’t negotiate prices,” said Erin Fox, the senior director of drug information at University of Utah Health. “Until the US has the ability to negotiate for prices, we will always pay higher prices.” Trump’s administration has expressed support for a bill by Republican Senator Chuck Grassley and Democratic Senator Ron Wyden which would lower certain drug costs. Congress is expected to pass a health bill this spring to avoid the expiration of some US health programmes, teeing up the prospect of an election-year deal on drug prices. However, Trump is also weighing whether to act on his own and order cuts in prices for some drugs bought by the Medicare programme for the elderly and disabled. © 2020 Bloomberg L.P.