Over the 11 years that Morningstar has been running its South African fund awards, the local unit trust market has gone through some major changes. These shifts have also been reflected in the funds emerging as award winnerss The first major development has been the huge growth in multi-asset funds. Back in 2010, there was R72.3 billion invested in aggressive allocation funds in the country, and R125.1 billion in South African equity funds. At the end of 2019, the money invested in aggressive allocation funds had shot up to R419.6 billion, while equity funds had only just more than doubled to R256.8 billion. “What we’ve seen in the last decade is this absolute explosion in terms of the assets invested in the asset allocation space,” says Tal Nieburg, MD of Morningstar South Africa. “This has been across a number of categories.” The most significant growth has been in aggressive allocation funds, which are widely used in retirement products that require portfolios to be Regulation 28 compliant. However, as the table below shows, all the asset allocation categories have enjoyed substantially increased interest since 2010. Source: Morningstar More choice “Alongside this, there has been huge growth in the number of funds,” Nieburg points out. “We have seen a substantial number of new fund launches.” The table below shows how the number of funds has ballooned across the asset allocation categories, while the South African equity category has not seen the same rate of growth. Source: Morningstar The most significant source of this growth has been from smaller and boutique managers. A number of these firms have launched funds that have performed extremely well, which has started to challenge the dominance of the large players in the industry. A changed landscape This has also been reflected in how the award winners have evolved. “The type of winner has changed in the last five years from being your larger managers to smaller specialist managers,” Nieburg points out. In both 2018 and 2019, five of the seven fund winners were managed by smaller, independent managers. Of the 14 finalists this year, nine are funds managed by smaller firms. In 2010, however, the reverse was true. Back then, five of the seven category winners were funds managed by larger asset managers. This year, this shift is also reflected in the firms making the list of finalists for the fund house awards. These categories recognise consistent performance by an asset manager across its fund range. With only a few exceptions, these awards have been dominated by the large, established firms over the past decade. For 2020, however, five of the six finalists are smaller, independent outfits. “This shows that these managers are delivering good risk-adjusted outcomes for their clients,” says Nieburg. “That reflects the shifts in the industry.” The Morningstar Award winners will be announced on February 27 in Cape Town. The finalists this year are: Best Aggressive Allocation Fund Kagiso Balanced Fund Sasfin BCI Prudential Fund Best Bond Fund ABSA Bond Fund Allan Gray Bond Fund Best Cautious Allocation Fund ABSA Inflation Beater Fund Kagiso Stable Fund Best Flexible Allocation Fund Coronation Optimum Growth Fund Select BCI Worldwide Flexible Fund (managed by Blue Alpha Investment Management) Best Global Equity Fund Nedgroup Investments Global Equity Fund (managed by Veritas Asset Management) PSG Wealth Global Creator Fund of Funds Best Moderate Allocation Fund Sanlam Investment Management Managed Moderate Fund of Funds Sasfin BCI Balanced Fund Best South African Equity Fund Kagiso Equity Alpha Fund Rezco Equity Fund Best Fund House: Larger fund range Investec Asset Management Marriott Asset Management Sygnia Asset Management Best Fund House: Smaller fund range Fairtree Asset Management Kagiso Asset Management Platinum Portfolios