In 2008, Mondi’s headline earnings per share fell by 49%. The following year, they dropped a further 44%. Anybody who had been reading the headlines was not that surprised. Paper, it was widely reported, was a dying industry. Newspapers and magazines were increasingly being consumed online, records were being produced and stored digitally, and mail services around the world were in decline. And this was all exacerbated by the global financial crisis. The outlook for a paper producer like Mondi was therefore bleak. The company’s share price more than halved during the 2008 sell-off, and did not bounce back in the 2009 recovery. It was still under water by the end of 2010. Nothing in the news would have suggested that this had any reason to change. And yet Mondi has grown its earnings before interest and taxes to more than three times since 2007, and more than 20 times from the trough it hit in 2009. The company’s shares have also moved – from R40 at the start of 2010 to over R320 today. That is a gain for shareholders of over 800%. Do you know what you don’t know? This may sound extraordinary, but this sort of story is really more common than most investors realise. “Often you see this dislocation, where the outlook for something is really poor, but the subsequent returns are quite good,” says Pieter Koekemoer, head of personal investments at Coronation Fund Managers. “A decade ago everybody thought fine paper is dead because all the advertising is moving online and there won’t be glossy paper printed magazines anymore,” he explains. “But what people failed to realise is that as advertising goes online, shopping goes online too and all the online purchases need to be packed in corrugated paper boxes.” Mondi’s management was astute and fortunate enough to see this shift happening. They noticed that no new paper mills were being built, and that many mills in Europe were being sold cheaply. “They acquired paper mills at really good prices and ended up in a dominant position to supply packaging material,” Koekemoer explains. Bank on it The recent history of Capitec is not that dissimilar. From the end of 2013 through most of 2014, African Bank was in the midst of its collapse. It seemed to many that it would likely take the entire unsecured lending market down with it. “This was a sector under considerable distress,” recalls PSG Asset Management chief investment officer Greg Hopkins. “It was in the headlines for all the wrong reasons. It was a very scary time for Capitec.” Caught in the fallout over African Bank, Capitec’s share price fell from R211 in October 2013 to under R185 by March the following year. A few months later, Moody’s cut the bank’s credit rating two notches to below investment grade. “If you’re a bank, which is a leveraged institution, you rely on public confidence,” says Hopkins. “So these were scary times for Capitec.” Anyone who bought shares in the bank at this time, however, would have since made nearly seven times their investment. In less than six years, its stock has climbed to just under R1 400 per share. Look around The lesson for investors in the current environment should be obvious. South Africa is beset with obvious risks and significant problems. These are all over the headlines. Subsequently, the market is treating the outlook for companies that operate in the country as extremely poor. The share prices of ‘SA Inc’ stocks have been knocked down to especially low levels, regardless of their quality. Chemicals company AECI is an excellent example. Over the past 30 years it has delivered higher shareholder returns and better return on equity than the Top 40. Yet at the start of 2018 it was trading at a 50% discount to the wider market on a price-to-earnings basis. Over the course of last year, when the FTSE/JSE All Share Index returned 12%, AECI was up 30%. “This was in a tough macroeconomic environment,” says equity analyst at PSG Asset Management Mikhail Motala. “It was an environment where a close peer of theirs, Omnia, needed a rights offer. It was during a time when there was still political uncertainty, and with no apparent catalyst.” AECI is still trading on price-to-earnings multiple of only 11, with a dividend yield of 5%. Which way are you leaning? “There are many other examples in South Africa like this at the moment,” says Motala. “There is huge rerating potential.” It may not seem that way from reading the headlines, and there may not seem any clear reason for this rerating to happen. But that is often the case. “When we look out to the future, we get very excited about the prospects,” says Hopkins. “Historically, the best opportunities are associated with some form suffering.” For investors, this is an important consideration. “The responsible thing to do is to lean against the wind,” Koekemoer says. “Because this counter-intuitive principle plays itself out over and over again.”