Local vehicle manufacturers are outraged at proposed guidelines for the aftermarket industry that will allow consumers to select a workshop of their choice when having their vehicles serviced, maintained and repaired. Read: New automotive code set to shake up the sector New vehicle owners are currently compelled to have in-warranty service, maintenance or repair work conducted only at approved dealers or approved service providers. The proposed guidelines, which were published for public comment by the Competition Commission on Friday, also deal with the relationship between original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) and dealers. Among other things, they state that OEMs must not impose onerous obligations on prospective dealers. Grandiose ‘Taj Mahal’ type dealerships have become commonplace in South Africa. However, the guidelines state: “The requirements for dealers must be reasonable and have an economic rationale, particularly in relation to the size of land, showrooms, furniture, fittings and finishes.” Naamsa not happy National Association of Automobile Manufacturers of South Africa (Naamsa) chief executive Michael Mabasa said on Monday that while the industry does not have any objection to any of the substantive reforms proposed in the guidelines, introducing these enforceable guidelines is extremely punitive and a dangerous retrogressive step that is counterproductive and will harm the economy. Mabasa said the proposed guidelines will compel the automotive industry to implement enforceable measures that could fundamentally change the current nature and structure of the automotive retail and aftermarket value chains in the country. He said they will also bring about some profound structural changes that will intrinsically remould the existing business models of all automotive multinational companies which continue to invest emphatically in the country’s economy, its workforce and its overall future growth. Mabasa added that Naamsa believes the industry is gradually creating a fertile environment upon which reforms can be implemented without harming the economy. He urged the commission to reconsider “its punitive approach” and rather use any guidelines it formulates as an industrial policy tool to stimulate economic growth and inspire business confidence. “The trajectory chosen by the commission this time, regrettably, is likely to achieve the opposite outcomes,” he said. ‘Big win’ for consumers However, Right to Repair SA (R2R), a Section 21 not-for-profit organisation that has been advocating for freedom of repair choice for vehicle owners, has welcomed the publication of the draft guidelines, adding that it is a positive move for the industry and a big win for consumers. Read: Vehicle repair industry in for a shake-up (2015) R2R chair Gunther Schmitz said it is encouraging to see such a strong focus on increased consumer choice, fair competition and competitive pricing – and that the increased transparency and freedom of choice for consumers will help grow small business. The unbundling of maintenance and service plans from the purchase price of the vehicle at the point of sale is another win for the consumer. Schmitz said at point of sale, dealers and financiers must now provide the consumer with details of all inclusions and exclusions in their service and maintenance plans. He said the draft guidelines point out that “this will allow consumers to exercise choice regarding whether to purchase the maintenance or service plan and make servicing a more affordable option for South Africans, while allowing for more players to provide such value-added services for consumers whose vehicles are in-warranty”. “It is good for the industry and good for consumers who can now make informed financial choices,” he said. Access to technical information Schmitz said it is encouraging that the commission acknowledged that access to technical information remains a prerequisite for effective competition in the automotive aftermarket. He said the commission is removing that obstacle by directing OEMs to share key technical information with independent service providers for both in-warranty and out-of-warranty motor vehicles. In the introduction to the draft guidelines, the commission said it has over the past decade received complaints regarding restrictive agreements between OEMs and various automotive aftermarket industry participants, including dealers and insurers, across the value chain. It said some of the competition concerns identified are: The commission said the guidelines are directed at addressing constraints to competition in the automotive aftermarket industry and to promote compliance with the spirit, intent and objectives of the Competition Act by encouraging relevant stakeholders to adopt and promote principles of effective competition regulation for a growing and inclusive economy. It said the specific objectives of the guidelines are to: The guidelines aim to achieve these objectives by encouraging stakeholders to adopt measures that: Stakeholders have until March 16 to submit formal comments on the guidelines. 