South Africa’s national vehicle dealership body has rejected the Competition Commission’s draft automotive aftermarket industry guidelines, claiming they are “totally unworkable in their current form”. “The guidelines have serious negative consequences, not just for original equipment manufacturers [OEMs] and dealers, but for consumers and our nation’s road safety initiatives,” said Mark Dommisse, the national chairman of the National Automobile Dealers’ Association (Nada) last week. Local vehicle manufacturers earlier expressed outrage at the proposed industry aftermarket guidelines that will allow consumers to select a workshop of their choice when having their vehicles serviced, maintained and repaired. Read: You will soon be able to service your car anywhere New vehicle owners are currently compelled to have in-warranty service, maintenance or repair work conducted only at approved dealers or service providers. Dommisse said Nada strongly believes that OEMs and importers have the right to determine the standards of those who service their products, in much the same way that Airbus and other aircraft OEMs do with aircraft, and to ensure the strict maintenance of those standards. “We interpret the guidelines published as being anti-consumer and a threat to road safety standards in South Africa,” he said. “Nada members and OEMs comply with strict technical and parts standards to ensure transparency and the best safety outcomes for our consumers. “It is extremely important to emphasise that the sale, maintenance, repair and operation of a motor vehicle is ultimately about safety and reliability, which also underpins the future value of the vehicle.” Right to Repair SA (R2RSA), a Section 21 not-for-profit organisation that has been advocating for freedom of repair choice for vehicle owners, earlier welcomed the publication of the draft guidelines, saying it is a positive move for the industry and a big win for consumers. Multiple wins R2RSA chair Gunther Schmitz said this increased transparency and freedom of choice for consumers is going to help grow small business, while unbundling of maintenance and service plans at the point of sale from the purchase price of the motor vehicle is another win for consumers. In terms of the guidelines, dealers and financiers must at the point of sale now provide the consumer with details of all inclusions and exclusions related to the service and maintenance plans to “allow consumers to exercise choice regarding whether to purchase the maintenance or service plan and make servicing a more affordable option for South Africans, while allowing for more players to provide such value-added services for consumers whose vehicles are in-warranty”. Schmitz said it is good for the industry and good for consumers who can now make informed financial choices. Motor Industry Workshop Association chair Dewald Ranft said the new guidelines will, if published in their current form, open up the market substantially and see some meaningful cost savings for consumers, without compromising on quality and service. Filum Ho, CEO of Autoboys, a leading South African auto glass, paint and parts specialist, said owners of new cars in South Africa are currently unique in the world in that they are locked into using a vehicle manufacturer’s service centres, repair shops and parts in “embedded” motor and service plans. Ho added that if these owners decide to use an independent service or repair provider of their own choice, vehicle manufacturers punish them by voiding their warranties. The new guidelines are set to make this practice illegal, he said. Anti-competitive behaviour charge rejected Dommisse said Nada takes great exception to the statements published by the Competition Commission of anti-competitive behaviour by Nada members, claiming this is “completely untrue”. “If this were true, the commission is duty bound to investigate each and every complaint made and take remedial action against those firms found to be in contravention of the Competition Act,” he said. “Broad-stroke allegations with no substantiation are contrary to a constitutional democracy and the compact between regulator and regulated. Moreover, this creates mistrust with consumers and undermines the integrity of the industry as a whole.” Dommisse added that the draft guidelines call for structural changes that will fundamentally compromise the existing franchise dealer business model and have a direct negative impact on employment stability within the industry. “It will be virtually impossible to effectively implement and regulate these guidelines,” he said. Dommisse said Nada has always maintained in engagements with the commission that transformation of the automotive value chain is an imperative. It is willing to work with relevant stakeholders to craft a way forward that is pro-consumer, enhances the already-competitive landscape, recognises existing investments and avoids free-riding. Impact on investment “In addition, we have serious concerns that the commission’s guidelines are counterproductive to the Automotive Master Plan 2035 and consequently could impact negatively on future investment,” he said. National Association of Automobile Manufacturers of South Africa (Naamsa) CEO Michael Mabasa previously said he personally reassured the commission in all his meetings, of the industry’s unambiguous commitment to systemically address barriers to entry, which remain very high in the industry for many new and aspiring entrants. “Clearly our messages fell on deaf ears because the commission chose ‘a stick approach’ and is now using these guidelines as a blunt instrument to achieve a goal that we were all working towards,” said Mabasa. “Introducing these enforceable guidelines is extremely punitive and a dangerous retrogressive step that is counterproductive and which will harm the economy,” he said.