ArcelorMittal said it’s more optimistic on the outlook for steel demand this year and expects the effect of the coronavirus outbreak in China will only be felt in the short term. The steel industry was hard hit in 2019 by slumping demand from automakers, trade wars and sluggish economies in Europe. While prices edged higher in the past two months, there’s concern the deadly virus will hurt consumption and throttle the industry’s nascent recovery. “ArcelorMittal believes that there are signs that the real demand slowdown is beginning to stabilise,” the company said in its annual results statement. For now, “we believe the effect of the coronavirus will likely have a short-term negative demand impact in China and to a lesser degree elsewhere.” Overall, ArcelorMittal expects global steel demand — a barometer of economic growth — to grow by 1% to 2% this year after expanding 1.1% in 2019. “The supportive inventory environment means that we are more optimistic on the apparent demand outlook for 2020,” the company said.  Most of the impact on first-quarter demand from the coronavirus is expected to be recovered throughout the remainder of the year, ArcelorMittal said. Still, demand from China is seen weaker this year, between flat and 1% higher, from estimated growth of 3.2%. Though ArcelorMittal has minimal exposure to China, it follows the country closely as demand there affects global steel sales and prices. The company was bearish on China’s demand a year ago and improved its forecasts three times during 2019, while cutting estimates for the U.S. and Europe. “Our perspective on the fundamentals of the Chinese steel market remain unchanged,” the company said Thursday. ArcelorMittal, which responded to weaker demand last year by curbing production in the European Union and planning the sale of up to $2 billion of assets, said earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation about halved in 2019, to $5.2 billion. Key figures from the earnings report: © 2020 Bloomberg L.P.