So you want to be financially free? Of course you do. Okay, so the next question you are probably asking is how long is it going to take you? Well, that depends on how much you earn, right? The more you earn, the faster you can become rich, and the faster you can tell your boss what you really think of Hawaiian Shirt Day, right? Wrong. Very wrong. Here is something for you to ponder … Imagine you are a top-rated doctor earning R200 000 a month. You have the usual six luxury vehicles and four houses with matching golf course memberships. You know, all the normal stuff that comes with the territory. The result is that you spend R200 000 a month. Sounds like a pretty epic life. But you know what? I wouldn’t wish it on anyone. Because if you spend everything you earn, you will never be financially free. Now this example may be a little extreme, but it illustrates a very important point…. The time it takes for you to achieve financial freedom has absolutely nothing to do with how much you earn, and absolutely everything to do with how much you spend. In fact, how much you spend versus how much you earn is the only factor when it comes to figuring out how long it will take you to be financially free: Most of us are somewhere in between these two extremes of being able to quit your job right now, and needing to work forever. And that’s because you are saving a portion of your salary every month and putting it towards your retirement. What’s your number? The amount of savings you put away as a percentage of your income is known as your savings rate (here is a more detailed explanation on calculating your savings rate.) Your savings rate is a really important number for you to know and to try improve because it is the only thing that determines how long it’ll take for you to become financially free. To see how this works in practice, the chart below shows the number of years it would take to achieve financial freedom according to your savings rate. Assumptions: 12% returns, inflation at 6.28%, investment amount required calculated using the 4% rule Some interesting observations from the chart above: The conclusion from all of this is this: you don’t need a high income to achieve financial freedom, you just need to make sure you are saving some of your income every month. Nowhere on the chart is there anything about how much you need to earn. The only factor is your savings rate. The bottom line is this: the higher your savings rate, the faster you will achieve financial freedom. In other words, your savings rate is where it’s at. And there are pretty much only two ways to increase your savings rate: A lot of people focus on the earning part. Now there is nothing wrong with this, but just keep in mind that it is quite an inefficient way of doing it, because you load yourself with an ever increasing tax burden for every extra rand that you earn. In addition, earning more often leads to spending more, and so it may not do anything for your savings rate. I can appreciate that earning more money is a really attractive prospect, and it certainly seems far more glamorous than getting down and dirty into your spending, but you should only focus on the earning side once you have got a handle on your expenses. Spending less is super-efficient – you get to keep all of your savings (tax has already been paid) and it will immediately give your savings rate a kicker. Less spending means more to invest, and every rand that is invested instead of spent pulls that financial freedom date a little bit closer.