Discovery Holdings says its newly launched bank “performed ahead of expectation, across all areas of the business” in the six months to end-December. As at February 18, Discovery Bank had 78 000 active clients with 180 000 accounts, nearly half of which it points out “had never held a Discovery Card before”. Contrast this with the 22 000 customers it had signed up in the first three months after launch in July. Three quarters of its customers are on bundled accounts (transaction account plus credit card); 40% of its customers hold Black accounts, 35% Platinum accounts and 24% Gold accounts. These customers have deposited a total of R1.2 billion, with R1 billion of the R2.5 billion in granted credit being utilised. More of its customers keep credit card balances month to month (thus paying interest) than those in the legacy Discovery Card book. Total transacted over the last eight months is R2.6 billion, and Discovery says its customers spend three times the market average. Credit arrears are, on average, five times less than the market. This is not surprising for a bank targeting the “mass affluent” (LSM 8 to 10) market. Source: Discovery interim results presentation Capital spend to date is R3.7 billion (versus an expected amount of R4.1 billion) and the bank is costing significantly less to run from a capex point of view than it expected (R1.178 billion versus R1.511 billion). Discovery expects a structurally lower cost-to-income ratio (30%) versus the typical 50% elsewhere in the market. Does Vitality work for banking? The entire proposition of Discovery Bank is premised on Vitality Money, which rewards clients for ‘banking healthier’ (in other words, driving behaviour change) with dynamic interest rates on both savings and credit, as well as boosted Vitality discounts and cashback. Discovery was taking a calculated bet that the Vitality model could provide the foundation for a bank. So far, it says the correlations it has seen on Vitality Money are “promising”. It says there are “strong correlations being observed by Vitality Money status in credit utilisation, deposits, spending and defaults – across the client base and account types”. Source: Discovery interim results presentation Discovery says “engagement and correlations are even stronger for clients with multiple Vitality products”. Are legacy Discovery Card customers migrating? Discovery has not said whether or not the migration of existing Discovery Card members from the FNB joint venture is tracking expectation. Not every customer will elect to move. Of the original 300 000 customers to move, it still has to move 192 000. Of its 78 000 customers, around 45 000 previously held a Discovery Card. This means only half of those who could migrate have actually moved to Discovery Bank thus far. The other roughly 50 000 would’ve closed their credit card account and stayed at their main transactional bank. Those who find the Discovery Bank proposition most compelling would surely all have moved already. One would expect the “conversion” rate to decrease across the remainder of this base. Discovery expects this migration to be completed by the second half of 2020. The fundamental question Discovery poses is whether it can build a retail-heavy bank of scale? It has said it needs “roughly 500 000 to 600 000 clients” to break even. Key to future client growth will be using its advisor channels to ‘sell’ bank accounts. Without the physical footprint of branches, this channel is critical. It says 1 300 tied agents and 4 500 independent financial advisors (IFAs) will start actively selling accounts in the second half. Nearly half of the former Discovery Card base was ‘sold’ the account through the “advisor distribution channel”. Discovery says priorities for this year include “simplifying the Vitality Money user experience and streamlining the service environment and online support functionality”. The bank has drawn criticism for service levels at the bank.