While Eskom has established a prima facie case in its bid to have the deduction of a R69-billion bailout from its tariffs by the National Energy Regulator of South Africa (Nersa) set aside, this was not enough to convince the Pretoria High Court that it required urgent interim relief to increase tariffs by under 17% over the next two years to avoid an economic collapse. “I am mindful that the matter nevertheless remains an important one and its determination should be dealt with without delay, therefore the determination of Part B of these proceedings is something that should be expedited,” said Judge Jody Kollapen in his judgment on Monday. Read: 
Eskom says regulator ‘artificially’ deducted billions in revenue from tariff 
Eskom vs Nersa: An imminent national crisis or fear-mongering? Kollapen dismissed Part A of Eskom’s application, where the ailing utility argued that it required a 16.6% increase for the 2020 financial year and 16.7% increase in 2021, pending the completion of Part B, or the entity could risk defaulting on its debt repayments and essentially crash the finances of the country. Default risk In 2019 Nersa granted Eskom tariff increases of 9.41%, 8.1% and 5.2% for the period spanning 2019 to 2021 instead of the 15% Eskom had requested for each year. At the centre of this was Nersa’s deduction of R69 billion from its allowable revenue, equal to the bailout granted to the utility by the state in February 2019. Eskom sits with a R450 billion debt burden on its balance sheet, R318 billion of which is guaranteed by the state. The utility argued that the understated tariffs granted by Nersa had placed it in a position where it could possibly default on one of its loans, triggering the payments of its state guarantees. In other words, that failure to come up with that amount will spark an immediate liability for the state to pay its full debt of R918 billion. Eskom argued that it required this urgent interim relief before it must table the tariff increases that will come into effect on July 1 in parliament, in line with regulations under the Municipal Finance Management Act. “Ultimately the financial health and survival of Eskom is the matter that falls within the sphere of government, influenced by prevailing economic realities,” said Kollapen. “It cannot be that the tariff determination for effectively a single year should be elevated to determining the survival or the demise of a significant state-owned entity and nor is it desirable to leave that determination to a court.” The court is not an expert Kollapen further stated that the determination of what is an appropriate increase remains in the hands of the regulator. He said the interim relief Eskom was asking for in the first part of the case would mean that the court would set the tariff, which “represents significant problems of principle and substance”. “At one level [is the] principle of the separation of powers which is [what] relegates strongly against the court responding to such an invitation,” said Kollapen. “The legislature has appointed a specialist body that has the expertise to do precisely that and the court should respect the carefully-crafted boundaries of its powers.” He added: “This court is not equipped to make the kind of determination that Part A requires; whether the increase of about 17% is consistent with the case at large, whether it strikes a fair balance within users and licensees, and its overall impact on the economy are all complex matters best left to agencies with the necessary expertise.” To that end, Kollapen has committed to assisting in the expediting of Part B of the case, which is the review of Nersa’s tariff determination. Nersa not beyond scrutiny In a statement, Eskom Chief Financial Officer Calib Cassim said the utility would take the guidance of the court on the issue, adding that despite ruling that the matter was not urgent, it was encouraged by the court’s acknowledgement that the utility’s case had merit. “The judge indicated that ‘Nersa violated the basic principle of accounting by treating an equity injection as revenue,’” said Cassim. “He continued to say ‘the reasonable judgement that Nersa is allowed to exercise cannot translate into an open-ended discretion that insulates it from scrutiny and judicial review … it must accordingly be arguable that the decision by Nersa in its treatment of the R23 billion [per annum for three years] equity is open to review and possible attack.’” <a href="http://iono.fm/e/757240">Content hosted by iono.fm</a>