The Auditor-General (AG) released the 2018/2019 Municipal Finance Management Act consolidated general report on local government audit outcomes last week. The report indicates extreme abuse of the public purse. Many municipalities have dysfunctional control environments, high levels of corruption, and are in dire financial straits. Read: Confirmation that municipalities are a huge burden on taxpayers However, the AG is of the optimistic opinion that local government does have sufficient money to fulfil most of the basic needs and aspirations of its citizens, but a lot more work needs to be done. With an apparent lack of oversight of municipalities, and no accountability or consequence management, there were 28 outstanding audits. If the government cannot get municipalities to submit their financial statements on time, how can it stem the tide of corruption? Audit outcomes The audit outcomes of the municipalities (excluding municipal entities) are reflected below for comparative purposes. Because irregular expenditure (IE) reflects the extent of mismanagement and possible corruption, the IE from uncompleted audits has been included, as well as the IE from Gauteng’s municipal entities of R1.8 billion (2018: R1.3 billion). The financial statements reflect a culture of unaccountability: All in all, these are dysfunctional control environments. There are greedy hands in the till, prolonged vacancies in key positions, no consequences for poor performance and transgressions, and a complete disregard for legislation, internal controls, and financial management. Our infrastructure and institutions are crumbling around us. Read: Municipal manager gets 48% increase during lockdown Our legal system is inadequate to deal with all this corruption. There should be a fast-tracked prosecutorial regime: lifestyle questionnaire, trace the assets, follow the money, claw back all settlements and pension/provident funds, take all assets, and imprison the guilty. Enough is enough. The AG is of the view that firm steps should be taken to “restore the integrity of these institutions and place them in a position to manage their finances towards the achievement of citizens’ needs”. And how does government view the report? Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, Minister of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta), tweeted that she “welcomed” the report. Perhaps the minister “welcomes” all AG reports. After all, the AG issued a disclaimer of opinion on the Cogta annual report for 2019 as he was unable to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence to provide a basis for an audit opinion. The Cogta audit report details a shocking lack of internal controls, non-compliance with legislation, and hundreds of millions of rand lost – including through payments made to wrong suppliers, ghosts, and non-qualifying government employees. Has the Minister got to grips with the corruption in Cogta? The fish rots from the head. Until the government stands up against corruption, the AG will be speaking into the void. Nothing will get done. The municipalities will continue to plunder and loot until it is unable to provide basic services. And then the consequences will be catastrophic. Listen to Nompu Siziba’s interview with Auditor-General Kimi Makwetu: <a href="http://iono.fm/e/884910">Content hosted by iono.fm</a>