Gross domestic product (GDP) is the common yardstick for measuring a country’s economic progress. Often when the GDP growth rate increases, it is assumed that the country is economically successful. However, can it still be the best measure of a country’s progress during a global pandemic, when most operations cease or scale down? SA’s economy shrank 2% in the first quarter of 2020, according to the latest GDP figures. Though the economy is a very essential indicator for social development, to only rely on GDP as a way to measure the progress in the country’s economy, rather than including human factors, means that a government’s ability to measure the social and environmental indicators that influence the real-life conditions facing citizens will be hindered. South Africa has a Gini coefficient of 63 – one of the world’s highest. Basically, it has a high level of persistent inequality. Links between economic growth and social progress In past quarters, there have been debates around the relationship between economic growth and social progress. But during a time, such as the Covid-19 pandemic, it is more important than ever. People are losing their jobs, many businesses are shutting down, and what is needed is a true reflection of what is happening on the ground as a result of the impact of Covid-19, so that there may be a better understanding of the country’s true state of well-being. Social philosopher and senior lecturer at the University of Cape Town’s Graduate School of Business Athol Williams explains that the GDP is an aggregate measure of economic output, not an indication of the actual lives lived by citizens. “Our lives are not simply about economic output. A more comprehensive measure of the actual lives lived is the Human Development Index (HDI) which has been adopted by the United Nations,” Williams says. He says that along with economic growth, the HDI includes measures of health and education that enable people to live better lives. “GDP misses important constraints that people face. It has traditionally been seen as a proxy for social good under the assumption that as an economy grows so the standard of living of all citizens grows.” Williams says that this is sometimes called “trickle-down economics” – which is a belief that growth in the macro-economy will trickle down and spread to every part of society. “This is empirically not the case, since GDP is silent on the distribution across members of society of the benefits of economic growth. “What GDP misses is the lack of access to the economy that many people face. Sharing the benefits of economic growth needs to overcome the structural barriers that many face such as poor education, dislocation from employment opportunities through apartheid-era spatial planning and poor public transport and so on,” William says. Athol is not the only one who share such sentiments. According to a 2010 article in the Social Indicators Research journal by Luca D’Acci, titled ‘Measuring Well-Being and Progress’, at the social level, factors such as life expectancy at birth, level of education, empowerment of vulnerable groups, quality of employment, and quantity of free time all give a more complete picture of personal development in society. Meanwhile, aspects such as gender-based violence, sexual harassment legislation, physical safety, criminality indexes, good governance, and the signing of international arms treaties, all provide for assessing the suitability of the environment in which we co-exist. He says that the GDP cannot distinguish between activities that have a negative or a positive impact on well-being. “GDP does not consider the non-economic factors that add to well-being. These limitations do not undermine the intrinsic value of GDP per se. But it should not be considered as a benchmark of the overall progress of society as is sometimes the case,” D’Acci says. What is needed are measures that will complement GDP and build a more nuanced and accurate understanding of economic and societal progress, he says, adding: “The GDP is an indispensable measure of economic activity that has successfully steered our economies through the post-war period, underpinning the prosperity we enjoy today.” He explains that with the new challenges faced by the 21st Century, it is only in understanding their shifts that governments can build societies and develop the capacity to respond effectively. Alternative D’Acci suggests that the ratio of bank assets to GDP, financial transparency, the proportion of military expenditure, sustainability and economic development, and external debt dependency are measures that could be used to further analyse social well-being – beyond impersonal GDP statistics – since they directly affect the fiscal contribution by a country’s taxpayers and the return they receive. According to the World Bank, more than two dozen countries globally have a per capita wealth decline. “Declining per capita wealth implies that assets critical for generating future income may be depleted, a fact not often reflected in national GDP growth figures,” it says. It says that investing in its people is the best possible solution that a developing country could have in order to ensure that there is personal growth among them. The report shows that human capital comprises about 70% of the wealth in high-income countries and only 40% in low-income countries. “Human capital is computed as the present value of future earnings for the labour force, factoring in education and skills as well as experience and the likelihood of labour force participation at various ages.” It makes a clear economic case for investing in human capital to boost wealth and future economic growth. Striving to grow GDP is not the same as ensuring the well-being of society. Developing human capital New Zealand is a country that has done well in de-throning the use of the GDP as a national measure of success. It uses human wellbeing as a measure of success – not its GDP growth. Read: Advice to Tito from New Zealand: Get your balance sheet in order Three years ago, the World Bank Group launched the Human Capital project, which focuses on creating a political space for national leaders to prioritise transformational human capital investments. It mainly focuses on the development of knowledge, skills, and health that people accumulate throughout their lives, enabling them to realise their potential as productive members of society. It says that this is the best way of protecting people’s livelihoods for the future of the workplace. “The cost of inaction on human capital development is going up. Without human capital, countries cannot sustain economic growth, will not have a workforce that is prepared for the more highly-skilled jobs of the future, and will not compete effectively in the global economy,” the 2018 World Bank Human Capital report states. It explains that the economic growth and development of a country depend on both human capital and physical capital, and on the factors affecting productivity. “Investments in these areas complement and reinforce each other. To be productive, a workforce needs physical capital, such as infrastructure, equipment, and a stable well-governed economy. In turn, a healthy, educated workforce can earn more and invest more in an economy’s physical capital,” its says.