As a result of Covid-19, South Africa’s lockdown protocol has had cumulative negative impacts on the SMME sector. Big and small business owners have had to change their business approach to survive these uncertain times. In this webinar, the SABC’s Reginald Nxumalo and Moneyweb’s Ryk van Niekerk, speak with business mentor Dr Roche Mamabolo, Business Process Mechanic CEO Marang Marekimane and YIEDI CEO Jayshree Naidoo on industry trends, and offer valuable insights and business tools to better equip SMMEs. More on the guests: Dr Roche Mambabolo Mambabolo is a founder of LORA Centre for Innovation and Entrepreneurship which has campuses in Johannesburg [South Africa and Gaborone [Botswana]. Roche started his career as an accountant, after completing his articles and worked for various consulting companies until he started his own entrepreneurship consultancy in 2006. By focusing on everything from effective entrepreneurship, innovation, and leadership, to the spread of ideas and changing everything, Roche has been able to motivate and inspire countless people around the country. Roche is a co-curator for TEDxGaborone [www.tedxgaborone.com] and curating team for TEDxJohannesburg [www.tedxjohannesburg.co.za]. Roche is the author of an entrepreneurship book called: The Start-Up Revolution: Fit In or Stand Out. His next book: Letters to EntrepreneursLetters to Entrepreneurs will be released in the near future. Roche has given two TEDx talks on entrepreneurship and innovation. Marang Marekimane Marekimane assists entrepreneurs to buy back their time and sanity. She does this by reviewing business models and automating business processes, formulating strategies to scale small businesses. Marang started Business Process Mechanics in 2014, after several attempts on side-hustles and 11 years as a Management Consultant. In 2018, Marang partnered with Entreprenerdy, an online entrepreneur support program that also facilitates access to mentors. The dashboard feature eases reporting for those investing in developing entrepreneurship. As a public speaker, she provides simple and practical strategies to access markets, resources and finance for entrepreneurs. She also shares insights on how to improve the entrepreneurship ecosystem. The highlight being a TED talk, “Made in Africa”. Jayshree Naidoo Naidoo is a thought leader on Innovation and Entrepreneurship and the CEO of YIEDI, a company that focuses on Innovation and Strategy Consulting, Incubation Design and Management, Entrepreneurship and Supplier Development and Digital and eLearning solutions. She was recently identified as one of Fast Company SA’s most Creative People in Business for “Putting Entrepreneurs First.” She is also and Inspiring 50 Nominee for Woman in STEM. She has held several leadership roles in SA that include positions at the Development Bank of Southern Africa, Discovery, ABSA and Internet Solutions. She was previously the CEO of Feenix, a crowdfunding platform for students launched by the bank, a board member of JASA (Junior Achievement South Africa), as well as the Chairperson of SAINe (The Southern African Innovation Network), and held a seat on NACI (The National Advisory Council on Innovation). Her last formal role was the Head of the Standard Bank Incubator, a model which was later replicated in Mozambique and Ghana She is a professional speaker and has presented at several public and company conferences both locally and internationally and has been featured in several magazines including but not limited to CEO Magazine, SA Innovator, Destiny, Fast Company and has been published in the Innovation Journal. Jayshree is often a guest presenter on 702 – The Money Show with Bruce Whitfield. She is a guest lecturer at many of SA’s top universities on the topics of Innovation, Incubation, Strategy and Digital Disruption. She was previously identified as one of the Top 25 Global FinTech Influencers. She has local and international experience in the fields of strategy, consulting, innovation, entrepreneurship and e-commerce. She has worked in the following sectors: Technology, Manufacturing, Health Insurance, Finance, Development Finance and Education. Her qualifications include an MBA, CAIB (SA), Honors in E-Commerce and IT. She has over 8000 Twitter and LinkedIn Connections and Followers.