‘For now I ask no more than the justice of eating.’
Pablo Neruda, Chilean poet and Nobel Prize winner Minister of Basic Education Angie Motshekga and the MECs of the various provinces have been held to be in breach of their constitutional duty in halting the feeding scheme under the National School Nutrition Programme (NSNP) during the Covid-19 lockdown, then reintroducing it in a very haphazard fashion, putting millions of school children at risk of starvation. Read: South African children face hunger as school closure halts free meals The Pretoria High Court on July 17 ordered that the NSNP be implemented without delay, and that it provide a “daily meal to all qualifying learners whether they are attending school or studying away from school as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic”. The education minister and the various provincial MECs put up what the judge referred to as a “semantic defence”, which was “rejected as being in bad in law and contrived”. The NSNP was initiated in 1994 by the first post-apartheid democratic government with the objective of alleviating hunger, thereby improving the quality of education by enhancing learning capacity, school attendance, punctuality and general health. The court recognised that providing the poorest of the poor child with at least one nutritious meal a day was a lifesaver. Covid-19 had the devastating effect of denying nine million school-going children with a daily meal. Schools were closed for 12 weeks. The government did announce various measures to mitigate suffering, but child support grants are paid per caregiver, not child, and the government only managed to deliver 788 000 food parcels, whereas the feeding scheme would have provided 45 million meals per week. The meagre food parcels would have not assisted some 77% undocumented children. Read: Covid-19 school closures in South Africa and their impact on children The judgment referred to the Report on Social Grants and Feeding Schemes under the Covid-19 Lockdown in South Africa by Professor Jeremy Seekings, director of the Centre for Social Science Research at the University of Cape Town. This report notes that “the social grant reforms failed to alleviate the plight of the poor”. “Millions of people who are in informal employment [have] received no income or grants and they cannot meet their and their families’ basic needs and expenses.” According to the report, “less food was distributed to poor families during the lockdown than before the lockdown”. The Children’s Institute, the amicus curiae (‘friend of the court’), gave evidence that an estimated 30% of the South African population experience severe levels of food insecurity. Further, an estimated 11.6 million children live in households below the upper poverty line. It was argued in court that the suspension of the NSNP has infringed on children’s right to basic nutrition. The court held that: Minister and MECs make statement under oath that differs from the facts Even though the minister and the MECs admitted that the NSNP was not rolled out as it should have been when schools reopened, the following statement was made under oath: “We are in fact doing precisely that which the applicants want us to do and we have been doing so without judicial supervision under a structural interdict.” Acting deputy Judge President Sulet Potterill commented: “Making such a statement under oath when the common cause facts show the contrary, is surprising and disturbing.” In non-legal speak, one can deduce that the minister and the MECs lied under oath. Potterill agreed with the applicants that the department has “played fast and loose with the facts” and therefore the department’s defence is meritless. By order of court The court made the following order: The minister and the MECs have to pay the costs of the court case, including the costs of three counsel. No doubt taxpayers will have to pay for this debacle and the behaviour unbefitting of a minister and MECs.