The extent of the government’s lack of understanding of how the private sector works just boggles the mind. Even the president, who has significant experience as a businessman, seems to be oblivious as to why the private sector and especially small businesses are failing. In his weekly newsletter, the president misconstrues the plight of entrepreneurs. He states that in the context of the disastrous impact of Covid-19 and the lockdown, he is “very pleased at the combination of foresight, creativity and business acumen displayed by several young South Africans who are coming up with home-grown solutions to the contemporary challenges we face. Some have started small business ventures because of personal circumstances, like losing their jobs. Others who were previously unemployed have seized the opportunity provided by the pandemic to create their own income.” The president motivates his statement by referring to a few entrepreneurs who have built tiny businesses to survive. This includes references to businesses that are making home deliveries during the lockdown, and a pizza restaurant filling a void and manufacturing face masks. It is good news that these businesses are blossoming in tough times, but these examples do not reflect the absolute destruction of tens of thousands of companies in many sectors that do not earn sufficient income to pay employees. These are not acts of innovative entrepreneurship. They are acts of utter desperation for people to put food on their families’ tables. A recent survey reflects that more than a million people lost their jobs between February and April. The number for May, June and July will be worse. It may even spike exponentially in July due to the termination of the Unemployment Insurance Fund’s Temporary Employer/Employee Relief Scheme (Ters) scheme. This is certainly the case in the suburb of Melville, where eight restaurants have already closed their doors, leaving many families without an income. Others will close after the Ters payouts stop. Ramaphosa’s newsletter is aimed at the economic plight of people in townships, and such communities are indeed facing significant financial hardship. He proposes that entrepreneurship is the answer. I am sure every single person in the country would support any efforts to promote entrepreneurship in these areas. But such steps should have been a core focus for many years. It is not a silver bullet to ignite entrepreneurial activity after an economic implosion of unprecedented proportions. The president’s assertion in the newsletter that the “concentration of markets and capital in large firms limits the potential of small businesses” is particularly alarming. South Africa’s lack of small business development cannot be laid before the door of successful businesses. The stark reality is that large businesses are also failing. The number of companies listed on the JSE was over 600 in 2000, but this has dropped to the current 350. Source: Moneyweb, Stats SA data The only way unemployment can decrease, is through economic growth. The graph above shows how unemployment declined to 22% in 2008 and that flowed from sustained economic growth until the international financial crisis in 2009. To introduce new regulations to limit the growth of big business to support small business is akin to government solving the problem of pupils being taught in the shade of trees by cutting down the trees. The solution would be to build actual schools. The president should not underestimate the negative impact government’s poor service delivery has on the private sector – which includes all small businesses. The meagre economic growth rate of late, and per definition the lack of growth in entrepreneurship, is a direct consequence of the government’s failure to provide basic infrastructure to stimulate business development. This includes water supply, electricity and internet access. The government has also allowed widespread corruption, tender fraud, state capture and desperately poor implementation of existing state policies. Furthermore, virtually all state-owned enterprises are bankrupt and consume government resources at the expense of all businesses – large and small. All of this has led to perpetually flailing fixed capital formation, which means that existing entrepreneurs are not prepared to invest to expand their existing businesses. The president also refers to the need for black business to thrive. This cannot happen if the economy is not growing. A growing economy will result in job creation and this will snowball entrepreneurship in all spheres of society. The most productive action government can take to stimulate small business development, is to do nothing. Or at least, as little as possible. The government should focus on improving the efficiency of its local government governance structures, formulate predictable policies (including policies to benefit black businesses), that will remain in place for decades to come and reduce crime and corruption. If the government can re-instil the belief that it is trustworthy and efficient, the arrows will start to point upwards. The private sector cannot build businesses on a rotten foundation. Fix the foundation and economy, and especially small businesses, will blossom.