Oil held losses in Asia after a US jobs report cast doubt on the strength of the demand recovery in the world’s largest economy. Futures in New York traded near $41 a barrel after closing down 1.1% on Thursday as data showed the number of Americans filing for unemployment barely dropped last week. The figures suggest the jobs rebound is stalling as states pause or reverse re-opening measures amid a surge in virus cases. Crude was still poised to eke out a modest weekly gain, being buoyed earlier in the week by the biggest drop in US stockpiles this year. OPEC+’s confirmation that it would start tapering output cuts from next month, adding at least 1 million barrels a day to the market, didn’t have a big impact on prices.  After rebounding rapidly from its nadir in April on supply cuts and returning demand, crude has traded in a narrow range since early June. The pandemic is still out of control in many parts of the world and the three main forecasting agencies — the International Energy Agency, the US Energy Information Administration and the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries — have all become more negative on the consumption recovery over the past month. “There’s a reality check coming,” said Michael McCarthy, chief market strategist at CMC Markets Asia Pacific in Sydney. “Oil prices are running well ahead of any economic recovery and I’m expecting a correction.” West Texas Intermediate for August delivery declined 0.1% to $40.73 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange as of 7:33 a.m in London. It’s risen 0.4% for the week. Brent for September settlement fell 0.2% to $43.28 on the ICE Futures Europe exchange and is up 0.1% so far this week. The global benchmark’s three-month timespread was 51 cents in contango, where prompt prices are cheaper than later-dated contracts. The market structure indicates concern about over-supply has risen since mid-June, when the timespread almost moved into backwardation, the opposite of contango. Goldman Sachs Group Inc. said it also sees the oil consumption recovery slowing, mainly due to the virus surging in the US. The daily rate of demand gains has dropped from 125,000 barrels a day in the first half of June to just 50,000 over the past three weeks, it said in a note. Citigroup Inc. was more optimistic, raising its third-quarter Brent forecast by $4 a barrel to $43 and saying it sees a “move to deep backwardation” in both Brent and WTI. OPEC and its allies will withhold 7.7 million barrels a day from the market in August, compared with cuts of 9.6 million currently. However, the actual reduction next month will be from 8.1 million to 8.3 million barrels a day due to compensatory curbs from countries including Iraq and Nigeria. The impact of this will be “barely felt” as demand recovers, according to Saudi Arabian Energy Minister Prince Abdulaziz bin Salman. © 2020 Bloomberg