On Friday morning, an appeal lodged by the Fair-Trade Independent Tobacco Association (Fita) was dismissed by the Pretoria High Court with costs, although the association has vowed to petition the Supreme Court of Appeal (SCA) for the right to appeal. Fita has been at loggerheads with government over its ban on tobacco products since the beginning of the nationwide lockdown which began at the end of March. It has also been vocal about the sufferings caused by the lockdown-induced ban of tobacco products and as a result, they have been in and out of court. Fita’s application was on the ruling by the High court last month said based on that the products were necessary and essential goods, did not hold ground and dismissed the matter. It also noted that that Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma had to act promptly and swiftly in order to meet her constitutionally mandated duty to save lives and provide adequate health care services. Despite another loss, Fita chairman Sinenhlanhla Mnguni said it would file the petition to appeal next week. “We have always had it in mind that this may be [the] eventuality when dealing with such things, when one deals with applications for leave to appeal. So we have [been] prepared to take the next step and which is petitioning the SCA for the same relief which is asking them to allow us to appeal the initial ruling by the full bench of the High Court which dismissed our application seeking to overturn the ban on cigarettes and other tobacco products by government,” Mnguni said. Ruling The High Court dismissed Fita’s appeal saying it failed to show the court that its appeal bears reasonable prospects of success at another court. “Fita has, in turn, failed to show compelling reason exists why the appeal should be heard. Not only are the arguments raised by Fita settled law, the arguments preferred by Fita regarding the national importance of the matter, are in our view, not sufficient to arrive at a finding [with] compelling reasons exist to grant leave,” the court ruled. It says that Fita failed to raise “novel questions”. “It appears to us that Fita’s argument is as set out in its heads of argument, that the matter is one of national importance and that it raises novel questions of law which requires an appeal court to reconsider the matter. “This is a classical shifting of the goalpost by Fita and must be rejected. The application raises nothing novel. The legal issues that arise in this matter have already been settled by our courts and the only conclusion we can reach is to disallow the application,” it says. It also said that Fita will have to incur the costs for the case. “In the circumstances, an order is granted dismissing the application for leave to appeal with costs including the costs occasioned by the employment of the counsel,” it says.