If emerging markets can get through the final week of the month without too many hiccups, some investors might consider July to be a platform for recovery. The benchmark MSCI stock index has risen 6.6% so far this month, underpinned by advances in Brazil, China and India, while the Hungarian forint and Chilean peso have led a rally in currencies. Brazil and South Africa have just helped drive the Bloomberg-Barclays index of domestic bonds to a fifth week of gains, their best streak since January, while dollar bonds have clocked up a 13th positive week, their strongest performance since 2011. “Dollar liquidity will continue to provide support, growth data is stabilising and debt-capital market access is available for most credits,” said Paul Greer, a London-based money manager at Fidelity International, which oversees about $566 billion. “We are optimistic on emerging-market currencies in the near term given the weak US dollar backdrop, competitive valuations, low inflation, improving current accounts, recovering PMIs and very light positioning.” Confidence in emerging markets is being buoyed by unprecedented stimulus efforts by the world’s leading economies, with last week’s approval by European Union leaders of a 750 billion-euro ($874 billion) recovery fund providing the latest spur. The Federal Reserve will probably signal more accommodation ahead when they meet July 28-29. Lawmakers in the US are trying to hammer out another round of pandemic relief before current support expires at the end of this week. Risks to the rally abound, however. Never mind that August is rarely a positive month for emerging-market assets, paltry signs of progress in stemming the spread of the coronavirus coupled with fresh twists in the deteriorating relationship between the US and China will suffice to keep traders on the back foot. Tensions continued to simmer over the weekend as Beijing slammed the “forced entry” to its Houston consulate by US personnel and vowed to respond “as necessary.”  Here’s what to watch for in the days to come: