Ever the optimist, Balwin Properties CEO Steve Brookes is undeterred by the coronavirus-induced doom and gloom gripping most sectors of the South African economy. Despite the initial lockdown bringing the residential property market to a virtual halt, with restrictions on trade and the deeds office closed for five weeks (to the end of April), Brookes says Balwin is still securing sales within its developments countrywide. “Through online sales, we signed around 200 deals in April,” he tells Moneyweb. “While the Covid-19 lockdown has had an impact, it has not stopped our business. We moved online and are doing about 60% of the sales that we achieve during a normal month.” Steve Brookes, CEO of JSE-listed Balwin Properties. Image: Supplied Brookes, the founder of South Africa’s largest sectional-title developer, was speaking to Moneyweb following the release of Balwin Properties’ full-year results to February 29, 2020, on Monday. The group posted an 11% increase in revenue to R2.9 billion, compared with the prior financial year. This saw its share price rising more than 10% on the release of its latest results. Despite local headwinds and the country going into a recession, Balwin sold 2 715 apartments within its developments countrywide, which was up by 278 units for the year. Its well-known residential developments include The Blyde in Pretoria, Polofields in Waterfall (Gauteng), Paardevlei Lifestyle Estate in Cape Town and the recently launched Munyaka mega development also in Waterfall. Listen to Brookes speaking about Balwin’s Crystal Lagoons coup (or read the transcript here):  SA’s poorer economic conditions, however, did eat into Balwin Properties’ operating profit, as the group invested more in marketing and increasing its staff complement to compete in the market. Operating profit for the year declined by 9%, from R630.1 million to R574 million. Group financial director Jonathan Weltman points out that while expenses increased to R235.6 million, this was in line with market guidance. “This was largely as a result of the bolstering of staff at mid and top management level, as well as strategic marketing-related costs.” Breaking sales records Brookes says post year-end, the group has secured more than 800 newly-signed deals for its apartments, with 600 of these linked to the flagship new R9 billion Munyaka development. “The launch of Munyaka in Waterfall resulted in Balwin breaking all sales records in March this year. We achieved over 807 sales for the month and around 600 were related to Munyaka, which will be home to the largest man-made lagoon in the southern hemisphere, featuring ‘Crystal Lagoons’ technology,” he adds. Brookes says the group has not seen a significant increase in cancellations of sales since the Covid-19 lockdown kicked in at the end of March. “This highlights the strength of the Balwin brand and product offering in the market. The group sells on average 300 apartments a month, and now with our online sales, we are selling around 200 apartments a month even amid the lockdown restrictions. We have not seen a major drop off in sales. “In response to the weak economy and consumer pressure, we’ve adapted our sales offering to include more one- and two-bedroom apartments. Demand for our green Edge-certified [Excellence in design for greater efficiencies] developments has exceeded our expectations by far,” he adds He says the SA Reserve Bank’s two 100-basis point interest rate cuts make owning a home much more affordable and he expects the bank to make another rate cut this week.