Many companies have had to change their business operations during the lockdown period. We caught up with several top executives to find out how they’re holding up, and whether or not it’s ‘business as usual’. Here’s what Pieter Bensch, executive vice-president, Africa & Middle East at Sage, says. Where are you working from? I have settled into my office at my residence in Johannesburg since the start of lockdown. How are you conducting your meetings? Microsoft Teams as a communications tool has been excellent. Sage is one of the top Microsoft Teams customers globally, and we continue to use this as part of our global communication strategy. Where it is possible, we have asked our colleagues to communicate with ‘video on’ to make communication easier and keep human contact. It is a lot easier talking to a person you can see and also pay attention to the non-verbal cues. During this time, it is essential to stay connected and engaged with my team. It is making a massive difference in how our teams communicate and stay in touch under the circumstances. How are you finding working away from your usual designated workstation? I enjoy not sitting in traffic every day. With more time available, I appreciate working out in the mornings before my workday starts. As we are more accessible and available, managing time and building in enough breaks into the day is challenging. While I used to work from home occasionally before the lockdown, it still took some time to settle into this new way of working on a longer-term basis. Is the lockdown causing a huge disruption in your business operations? For us, at Sage, it has mostly been business as usual. We were proactive in enabling our entire workforce to work remotely even before government announced the lockdown. We have seen some decline in support calls but an increase in digital and chat support. Cloud accounting and payroll product sales have increased, while desktop sales have slowed down. It is a clear indication that our customers now understand the power and benefits of cloud solutions to maintain business continuity more than ever before. Moving forward, how does your company need to transform in order to keep up with the changing times? We are thinking of working-from-home strategies and 4IR [fourth industrial revolution]. We have definitely realised that we do not need as much office space going forward. Working remotely using the correct tools means that we can remain very productive. International travel will undoubtedly be less of a requirement going forward. After lockdown where are we likely to see you? My first stop will most definitely be the Okavango Delta in Botswana. What do you crave the most? Having a Seattle coffee in our Johannesburg canteen and chatting to colleagues around the office. What are you most indulging in while working from home? My red wine collection is depleting quickly! On the upside, my morning exercise routine at home has become part of my daily routine, and I am drinking a lot more water. Is there a particular song, series or book that is keeping you busy during this time? I am reading digital business and car magazines. It has also been refreshing to hear the radio in the background when I go for a coffee break. We are six individuals working from home, including teenage kids at high school and university – all doing online classes. Right now, we would probably find you ditching your suit for: Jeans and golf shirts, for sure. Read:
Keeping up with the CEOs amid Covid-19: MTN head
Keeping up with the CEOs amid Covid-19: Naspers SA head
Keeping up with the CEOs amid Covid-19: Mike Brown
Keeping up with the CEOs amid Covid-19: African Bank