While Ninety One has published good results in its new guise as a separate company after splitting from Investec, its true potential as an independent investment manager will only show in the financial year that just started. The results just published, for the year to March 2020, still reflect that of a division of Investec as the de-merger, new brand and separate listing on the JSE and LSE were only finalised during March 2020. Not by choice, Ninety One happened to choose a difficult year to start a ‘new’ investment management business. CEO Hendrik du Toit says that in many ways the past year was one of two parts. “Most of the first 11 months took place against the background of rising markets and an expanding global economy. During this period, our short- and longer-term investment performance, as measured at firm level on an aggregate asset-weighted basis, displayed an improving trend “As at the end of December 2019, our one- and three-year out performance stood at 81% and 71% respectively,” says Du Toit. After global markets crashed in March 2020 due to the Covid-19 pandemic, investment performance deteriorated to the point where the figures quoted above fell to only 39% and 55%. Du Toit says that value strategies – investing in (mostly unpopular) shares with the hope of them reflecting their true potential when market sentiment swings – had a particularly tough time. New opportunities However, he says that this period of market uncertainty will create opportunities over the coming year for what he terms ‘substantial alpha generation’, indicating that Ninety One is of the opinion that markets are bound to recover in general. “The investment teams have been here before,” says Du Toit. “As we look ahead to the new year, we recognise the challenging market conditions and the competitive environment which we face.” Management is of the opinion that the global investment environment will improve, but still expects significant revenue pressure in the coming period. The results of the past financial year illustrate this clearly. While Ninety One benefited from net inflows of new investment funds to the tune of ₤6 billion, the decline in global markets at the end of the year resulted in a drop of assets under management of 7% to ₤103.4 billion at the end of March, compared with ₤111.4 billion a year ago. Thus, the drop in the markets cost Ninety One nearly 12% in terms of assets under management. Investment funds invested in alternative investments took the biggest knock, declining by 20% to ₤2.6 billion, followed by a decline of 15% in the total value of assets on the SA fund platform. In nominal terms, global equities declined the most, by more than ₤5 billion. Assets under management Source: Ninety One presentation to shareholders The decline in the value of assets under management has not had a big impact on income, as yet. The sharp drop in markets came right at the end of the financial year and Ninety One still received asset management fees for most of the financial year based on a healthy level of assets. Du Toit’s comments about a strong investment performance in the first 11 months bear this out. Net revenue increased 10% to just below ₤610 million in the financial year to end-March. Performance fees made a nice contribution to this, increasing to ₤21.5 million compared with ₤11m million in the previous year. Profit before tax and a list of exceptional items increased 11% to ₤198.5 million. The exceptional items included the non-recurring cost of the new Ninety One branding, a massive ₤10 million. In a presentation to shareholders on Wednesday morning, Du Toit said that operating expenses also included non-recurring costs of ₤6.5 million, resulting from the company operating duplicate offices in London for most of the year. Shareholders would probably be very happy with the increase of 12% in headline earnings per share to 16.8 pence. A double-digit increase in earnings is something to smile about in London, while translating it to rands at the current exchange rate yields a figure of R3.71 per share. This indicates a price/earnings ratio of a hefty 12.8 times on the current share price of R43.75 – following the increase of 4% in the share price in the few hours after the publication of the results. It is interesting that the movement of the Ninety One share price over the last few weeks seems to affirm management’s views that the market crash has delivered opportunities. The share hit a low of R27.50 on March 23 before recovering nearly 60% to the current level. Hopefully, Ninety One’s investment team can catch these potential opportunities for its clients. Du Toit believes they can: “Although the past year is correctly characterised as eventful, our strategy remains consistent. Ninety One continues to provide a range of specialist active strategies to its global client base. “We believe our staff stability and strategic clarity position us well for the long term. We intend to use this moment of the market and economic dislocation to inspire ourselves to build a better firm, develop better ways of investing and renew our commitment to building a better world.” They would want to: Ninety One employees own more than 21% of the company.