South Africa’s reported Covid-19 infections increased by 437 on Monday, taking its total number of confirmed cases to 7 220, while the death toll increased by seven to 138. With 64 coronavirus-related deaths and 3 362 confirmed cases, the Western Cape is a growing hotspot for the virus in the country. The province effectively accounts for just more than 46% of both SA’s confirmed Covid-19 cases as well as deaths. This can be seen in the latest Covid-19 stats, revealed by Health Minister Zweli Mkhize on Monday night, as part of the Health Department’s daily update on the spread of the virus in the country. Gauteng is home to the second highest number of cases – however with its tally at 1 661, this represents just less than half of the number of reported cases in the Western Cape. Gauteng has the fourth-highest number of virus-related deaths (14), behind the Western Cape, KwaZulu-Natal (35) and the Eastern Cape (17). Source: National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD)/ Department of Health Despite an increasing number of confirmed cases and deaths in the Western Cape, the province’s premier, Alan Winde, has played down the region being an “epicentre” of the virus. He says the higher number of confirmed Western Cape cases is due to the province actively tracing and testing people. In his latest statement, Mkhize noted that six of the seven newly-reported Covid-19 deaths were in the Western Cape, while one was in KwaZulu-Natal. “A total of 257 541 tests have been conducted to date with 11 794 tests done in the past 24 hours,” the minister said, however, he did not provide a breakdown of the number of tests undertaken per province. Meanwhile, Mkhize also noted that as of May 2, South Africa had 2 746 recoveries from the virus while 411 Covid-19 patients were in hospital. “This translates to approximately 5% of all Covid-19 confirmed patients and this is consistent with the hospitalisation rates that were seen in China. “Our mortality rate has remained stable at around 1.9% since the first death was reported. This is below the world average which is 3.4% as estimated by the World Health Organisation,” he pointed out. “As a reminder to all South Africans, the principle of flattening the curve is to limit the spread of the infection such that the numbers do not rise to the extent that they overwhelm the health care system,” he warned. “As winter sets in we will be confronted with the additional burden of influenza and other pneumonias, bronchiolitis in children, exacerbations of asthma and chronic obstructive air-ways disease and winter-related trauma, like burn injuries. I therefore urge each and every South African to continue to play your part in easing the load on the health care system,” Mkhize added. “Stay home if you do not have to venture out, wear a mask at all times in public places, wash your hands regularly and disinfect surfaces you normally come into contact with,” he reiterated. Mkhize also urged employers whose businesses have reopened following the easing of the nationwide lockdown, to take “all the necessary measures” to safeguard employees. This includes the relevant personal protective equipment as well as through social distancing.