When Heather Sonn replaced Christo Wiese at the helm of the troubled Steinhoff International (Steinhoff) on December 14, 2017, she was impressively in control. Sonn joined the Steinhoff group in 2013, when she was appointed as non-executive director of Steinhoff Limited. Moving up the chain, she was appointed as non-executive director of Steinhoff International in 2015 and then to the board sub-committee in early December 2017. She is, and has been, a director of many other companies. Sonn’s resignation was announced on May 18 in a Sens notice titled ‘Disclosure of inside information pursuant to art. 17 of the EU market abuse regulation (EU 596/2014) (MAR)’. The regulation in question With its primary listing in Frankfurt, Steinhoff falls under the purview of European Parliamentary regulations. The scope of the European market abuse regulation (MAR), which can be viewed here, is defined in Article 1 – the objective is to establish a common regulatory framework on insider dealing, the unlawful disclosure of inside information and market manipulation (market abuse), as well as certain measures to prevent market abuse. This regulation applies to financial instruments, including any transaction, order or behaviour concerning any financial instrument, in terms of both actions and omissions, in the European Union and in a third country. Article 17 concerns disclosure requirements: inside information must be made public in a “manner which enables fast access and complete, correct and timely assessment of the information by the public”. The Sens notice In the Sens notice announcing her resignation, Sonn explains that a transaction was “unwittingly conducted”, and that when she saw a “name” in the Viceroy Report she asked PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) to look into this. Sonn is the major shareholder of Gamiro Investment Holdings, the company that had “unwittingly” acquired a stake in the debt collection agency Blake & Associates from Geros Financial Services. Blake is a debt collector for the JD Group. The Sens notice refers to a complex transaction. “In 2017 Gamiro procured an option to acquire an interest in Blake from (a subsidiary of) Geros”, and further: “In September 2018 Blake bought back its shares from Geros, and Gamiro subsequently acquired a direct interest in Blake.” It is to be noted that Sonn was a director of Blake from May 2017 until January 2018. She was also a director of Blake and Associates Offshoring (per Steinhoff Africa Retail Limited pre-listing statement dated September 4, 2017). The Sens notice further states: “Recently obtained information suggests that Geros may have been associated with and (indirectly) funded by the company, which would then make the Geros transaction a related party transaction. Ms Sonn has informed the company that she was not aware of this at the time.” Sonn states: “Based on what is now known to me it would have required certain disclosures which I would have made had I been aware thereof.” It is strange that Sonn was not aware of the Blake transaction. When Gamiro procured an option to acquire an interest in Blake from a subsidiary of Geros in 2017, it would have been disclosed as an asset in the financial statements of Gamiro. When the Blake transaction effected, the option would have been realised, and the acquisition of Blake would have been disclosed in the Gamiro financial statements – either as an equity accounted investment, or included in the consolidation. It is also strange that Sonn was not aware that Steinhoff had indirectly funded Geros as it was disclosed in Steinhoff’s 2017 annual report. Steinhoff 2017 annual report The Steinhoff annual financial statements dated September 30, 2017, were released on May 7, 2019. Steinhoff had taken an additional period from December 7, 2017, to May 7, 2019, to finalise the report. Sonn had signed the supervisory board report, which formed part of annual report. It is to be expected that Sonn had studied the financial statements. PwC had completed the Steinhoff forensic report on March 15, 2019 (not publicly released), which the directors had been privy to. This report may have triggered an alarm of non-disclosure, as the Geros was transaction took place in 2017 and was disclosed in the 2017 annual report. The information on the indirect funding given by Steinhoff to Geros is provided under affiliated-party transactions (Note 30) in the annual report. It is also disclosed in the 2018 annual report. Essentially, Geros, incorporated in South Africa, is a wholly owned subsidiary of Geros Beteiligungsverwaltungs GmbH (Geros B), a company incorporated under the laws of Austria. Geros B was a subsidiary of the Fihag Group “at some point in time” (Fihag was controlled by Bruno Steinhoff). Geros acquired two debtors books and a 70% interest in Blake from Steinhoff for R300 million and R163.1 million respectively during 2013. The acquisition was funded by Steinhoff through its loan to Top Global Investments GmbH, whereby Top Global advanced a loan to Geros B to the value of €31.6 million (R450.3 million). There were no formal loan agreements. In my view, the indirect funding given by Steinhoff to Geros is fully disclosed. Peter Wakkie, vice chair of the supervisory board at Steinhoff, commented that: “Ms Sonn has in no way been found to have participated in the accounting irregularities at Steinhoff.” The implications of the MAR notice, if any, may be clarified in the 2019 annual report, expected to be published on June 30, 2020. With the Mazars Group having been appointed as Steinhoff’s external auditor, signalling a decisive break from the so-called Big Four accounting firms, we can hope for better disclosure and more transparency. Curson holds shares in Steinhoff.