The government will begin consultations with the intention of seeing most of the country, except areas with high rates of Covid-19 infections, moving to alert Level 3 of lockdown by the end of May said President Cyril Ramaphosa. Addressing the nation on Wednesday evening Ramaphosa said that further announcements will be made after consultations with relevant stakeholders have concluded. In addition to potentially easing the nationwide restrictions, government will “in the next few days” announce changes to Level 4 regulations and expand the business activities that will be permitted in a number of sectors such as retail and e-commerce. The government will also reduce restrictions on exercise, which, since the country moved from a hard lockdown in alert Level 5 to Level 4, has only been allowed between 06:00 and 09:00. “Our goal is to steadily increase economic activity while putting measures in place to reduce the transmission of the virus [and] provide adequate care for those who become infected and need medical treatment,” said Ramaphosa. Concentrations of infection He said infections are concentrated in a few metropolitan municipalities and districts, saying it is critical that “stringent restrictions” remain in these areas and that travel to other parts of the country with lower rates of infection remains limited. Source: Government He reiterated that should the lockdown be lifted without caution there is a risk of a “rapid and unmanageable surge in infections”. Lockdown was essential Ramaphosa stressed that had the government not instituted the severe and now almost seven-week long lockdown the best current estimates show that at least 80 000 people would have been infected with the virus and the death toll would have been eight times higher. The latest information is that Covid-19 infections in South Africa are now sitting at 12 074 confirmed cases and 219 deaths. “By contrast, at a similar stage in the progression of the disease, the United States had recorded over 22 000 deaths and the United Kingdom over 19 000 deaths,” he said. Source: Government Ramaphosa’s address came after the government faced public criticism and pressure to open up economic activity, in particular the revision of restrictions under Level 4 lockdown, which does not allow for full e-commerce activity or the sale of alcohol, cigarettes and summer clothes. “By delaying the spread of the disease, we have been able to strengthen the capacity of our health system and to put in place wide-ranging public health programmes to better manage the inevitable increase in infections,” he said. Mobilisation In what he described as the “largest and most extensive public health mobilisation in the history of our country”, the government has been able to acquire an additional 25 000 beds for quarantine, more quantities of personal protective equipment and medical equipment, and to increase testing and screening. To date, over nine million people have been screened for Covid-19 and 370 000 tests have been conducted  in SA. In advocating for a lift of the restrictions, some have argued that the purpose of the lockdown was to prepare the county’s health system for Covid-19, and that government has been able to do so. Ramaphosa responded by saying that government’s approach has been based on “saving lives and preserving livelihoods”. He warned that while the rate of infection was slowed by the lockdown, it would inevitably increase as restrictions are lifted and more people return to work, making this phase of the country’s response to Covid-19 “more difficult than the present one”. “It is our actions now that will determine whether the advantage we gained through the lockdown can be sustained,” he said “It is our actions now – individually and together – that will determine whether the great sacrifices that people have made over these last two months will ultimately save the lives of thousands of South Africans and spare our country from the huge devastation that this pandemic can cause.” ‘Embrace change’ Ramaphosa was at pains to assure the public that the government is “determined and committed” to ensure that decisions are taken in good faith, are reasonable, are based on empirical evidence and “do not cause more harm than good”. “Where we have disappointed, we will continue to make amends. Where we make mistakes, we will continue to correct them,” he said. “Although there may have been differences and disagreements, there has also been kindness, empathy and compassion. There has been courage and solidarity”. “A very different South Africa and world awaits us. The greatest test will be our willingness to embrace change.”