With an additional eight million people expected to return to work when the country shifts to Level 3 lockdown in June, the pressure will now be on businesses to ensure the health and safety of employees. Business lobby groups have welcomed the further reopening of the economy and commended the consultative approach government embarked on in structuring the way forward. On Sunday evening President Cyril Ramaphosa reiterated that while the lockdown has delayed the spread of Covid-19, it is not a permanent solution and infections will only continue to rise further and sharply as the country returns to normal. Read: SA to move to Level 3 lockdown The country currently has 22 583 confirmed Covid-19 cases, with just over 11 000 being active cases. To date under 430 people have died. “Until there is a vaccine available to all, the coronavirus will continue to spread in our population. This means that we must get used to living with the coronavirus for some time to come,” said Ramaphosa. Corona-ready The safety of workers will largely rely on a “social compact” between government and key role-players; over this week sector protocols will be established, with businesses expected to have workplace plans before re-opening their operations. At a basic level, businesses will have to ensure that their facilities are sanitary and allow for social distancing. Workers have to be screened daily and those who are suspected of having Covid-19 should be quarantined and arrangements made for them to get tested. Businesses are also required to assist with contact tracing if employees test positive. Ramaphosa said larger employers will also be consulted on making quarantine facilities available for their workers. Read: SA to move to Level 3 lockdown “A lot of creative energy is going into thinking through how business can meet these requirements,” says Busisiwe Mavuso, the chief executive of Business Leaders South Africa (BLSA). “There is no such thing as zero-risk, but the challenge is to minimise risk as far as is reasonably possible. Just what amounts to ‘reasonable’ is, of course, subjective, but the science is increasingly giving us insights into what slows transmission.” She says the non-medical interventions, such as the provision of protective gear and allowing for social distancing, are non-negotiables. Mavuso says employers now have to consider new ways of working, ensuring that employees can travel safely to work by possibly staggering production times to avoid peak traffic. “If we can demonstrate that operating supports, not hinders, the fight against the disease then there will be a rapid move through the lockdown phases.” New normal In the same vein Business for South Africa’s (B4SA’s) Martin Kingston says restarting the economy will require “a different premise” where everyone is willing to adapt to new ways of living to fight the virus. “The safe reopening of our economy requires behaviour change from all of us,” says Kingston in a statement. “Because we can expect to live with the virus for an extended period of time, we will have to change the way we conduct our lives. We need to embed the health and safety protocols, and these must become part of our everyday lives.” B4SA is of the “firm view” that the country’s economic decline could be slowed down by a quick transition into Level 3 that is underpinned by health and safety protocols. While it welcomes the ease to Level 3 the group says there is a further need to swiftly ease economic restrictions. Read: At last, sanity in state’s lockdown plan Ramaphosa said the return to work will be phased in to ensure that companies are fully prepared for employees. All manufacturing, mining, construction, financial services, professional and business services, information technology, communications, government services and media services, will commence full reopening from June 1. This is in addition to all the sectors that could operate under Level 4. However economic activities that are considered high risk, such as restaurants and bars, will only be allowed to offer delivery services. Accommodation services and domestic air travel (except for business purposes) will be phased in at a later stage. The sale of cigarettes is still prohibited and the personal care and beauty industry cannot operate. Consultations on how these services can reopen safely are underway, with Ramaphosa saying government is still considering proposals from the tourism and hospitality sectors.