US futures rose as investors prepared for some of the biggest banks to report earnings including Wells Fargo & Co. and Bank of America Corp. The pound weakened against all its Group-of-10 peers as Brexit negotiations remained deadlocked. European stocks were mixed, with travel shares declining on concern over more lockdowns, while financial shares climbed. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Asian stocks dipped, with China Evergrande Group shares slumping after the embattled developer raised less than anticipated in a share sale. Treasuries and the dollar were steady.  Investors are looking to earnings season to provide a spark for equity markets amid the dwindling prospects for more economic stimulus before next month’s election. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi demanded the Trump administration revamp its latest offer on Tuesday while Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell pushed a smaller-scale strategy that she quickly rejected. “We continue to see the ping-pong back and forth between the White House, Senate Republicans and Democrat controlled House, and what’s at stake is both the size of the stimulus but also what the money goes toward,” David Chao, a strategist at Invesco Ltd., said on Bloomberg TV. “I still think there will be a stimulus package between now and the end of the year, which is what the market is partially discounting.” On the coronavirus front, countries across Europe widened curbs to try to regain a grip on the pandemic. Infections rose at the fastest pace since April in Germany, the Dutch prime minister ordered a partial lockdown and France reported a surge in patients needing intensive care. Crude oil slipped close to $40 a barrel in New York trading as Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman and Russian President Vladimir Putin urged other OPEC+ oil producers to stick with agreed production cuts. In emerging markets, Zambia has told creditors including Eurobond holders that the government won’t be able to meet its obligations if they don’t agree to its proposed interest payment holiday. The bonds fell to four-month lows. Here are some key events coming up: These are some of the main moves in markets: