South African Finance Minister Tito Mboweni allocated R10.5 billion ($641 million) for the grounded state-owned airline to implement its rescue plan, taking money from other government departments. Mboweni made the announcement in Wednesday’s medium-term budget policy statement, ending a long personal resistance to funding further bailouts. The support adds to the R16.4 billion the Treasury set aside over three years in February for South African Airways to repay its guaranteed debt and cover debt-service costs. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The fate of the national carrier has become an emotive topic in South Africa as the country struggles to recover from the Covid-19 pandemic and revive an economy already in recession before the virus hit. Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan made saving the airline a priority, but Mboweni had always said extra cash would have to come from private investors. The money will be redirected from several national departments, with the biggest cuts to the allocations for police and tertiary education. South Africa’s cabinet made the decision to fund the business-rescue plan and has not attached conditions, Treasury officials said in a lockup session before the budget presentation. SAA was placed in administration in December, hasn’t made a profit in almost a decade and has long relyed on state support. Keeping it afloat is seen by opposition parties and some analysts as an expensive distraction for the government at a time when it needs to rescue the more crucial state power utility and reinvigorate economic growth. State-owned companies continue to present significant risks in the form of contingent liabilities and direct requests for state support, the Treasury said in the budget statement. Other companies highlighted as risks include: