South African state arms firm Denel said on Wednesday it faced a funding gap of around R2.75 billion ($168 million) over the next five years for key capabilities such as ammunition production and aircraft maintenance. Denel, which makes military equipment for South Africa’s armed forces and export, has long been in the throes of a liquidity crisis which has been aggravated by the Covid-19 pandemic. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. It is one of a handful of struggling state companies the government has been keeping afloat with bailouts. Interim Chief Executive Talib Sadik told a parliamentary committee that Denel had asked the defence ministry to provide R683 million in the current 2020/21 financial year to cover the funding gap for “sovereign and strategic capabilities,” which if lost could threaten South Africa’s ability to defend itself. A presentation to the committee showed funding gaps of R635 million, R600 million, R431 million and R400 million in the subsequent four years for sovereign and strategic capabilities, which also include things like missiles. The request for defence ministry support this financial year is on top of the R3.8 billion that Denel is seeking from the National Treasury over 2021/22 to 2023/24. Sadik said on Wednesday that Denel was taking steps to cut costs, reduce debts and dispose of non-core assets. But he said difficulties paying full salaries this year had led some important technical staff to leave. Denel’s presentation showed it owed R391 million in unpaid salaries and statutory obligations like payments to its employee pension fund. State asset manager the Public Investment Corporation recently rolled over R2.5 billion of Denel bonds for a further 12 months, and the government disbursed more bailout cash to help Denel repay debt, the presentation also showed. On top of that Denel is due to receive a further R271 million from the government this financial year.