Global stocks and equity futures saw choppy trading Tuesday as investors weighed whether coronavirus cases will hurt the global economy and stimulus talks in Washington dragged on. The dollar retreated. US futures edged higher with their European counterparts, while Asian stocks pared earlier losses. Shares were little changed in Japan and China, and slipped in South Korea, Australia and Hong Kong. Declines were more modest than those seen in the US overnight, when the S&P 500 saw its biggest loss in a month. Ongoing spending talks in Washington continued to weigh on sentiment as prospects dimmed for fiscal aid before the presidential election. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The 10-year Treasury yield steadied around 0.8%. Oil climbed with copper, while gold edged higher.  Surging coronavirus infections around the globe are worrying investors already cautious with the US election a week away and time running out to finish an aid package before then. Europe took a step closer to the strict rules imposed during the initial wave of the pandemic, with leaders struggling to regain control of the spread while confronting growing opposition to restrictions. “Investors should stay patient while waiting for the election results to clarify,” said Tai Hui, chief Asia market strategist at JPMorgan Asset Management. “The potential optimism around a deal could be dampened as we approach election day. The recent surge in infections in the US and Europe is also denting market sentiment.” In Washington, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin again attempted to reconcile differences on a virus relief package. Differences between the two sides “have narrowed,” but “the more it narrows, the more conditions come up on the other side,” White House economic adviser Larry Kudlow told reporters. These are some events to watch this week: Here are the major moves in markets: