Over the past five years to the end of August, the Sarasin IE GlobalSar Dynamic fund returned 82.8% in rand terms. The category average for mixed-asset balanced USD funds for this period was 66.2%. Speaking at the BCI Global Investment Conference, Sarasin’s Erik Mermet noted that key to this performance has been the firm’s approach to its equity allocation. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. “Equity investing remains the core of what we do, and the core performance engine within the GlobalSar fund range,” said Mermet. “We need a strong framework to find those compelling long-term opportunities.” Lower growth This is particularly the case in the current environment. “We believe that growth rates are going to be a lot lower going forward,” said Mermet. “This may seem very obvious after Covid-19, but if you add demographics, government debt, and the potential for deflation, the reality is that nominal growth is never going to be as high as it used to. “The world faces a period of structurally lower growth,” he added. “This means there will be more and more companies that simply aren’t growing. We expect to see a scenario where, on average, 28% of companies will see shrinking profits, compared to 17% before. “That means that the number of companies with the return dynamics we look for is getting smaller.” Sarasin’s answer to this problem is to employ a multi-thematic approach, aimed at identifying those companies operating in industries with long-term growth drivers. Finding winners “We live in an increasingly thematic-driven world,” said Mermet. “It’s an environment of fewer winners than in the past, but one in which the winners are substantially more valuable.” There have been obvious examples of the sharply higher value in companies in areas like electronic payments and cloud computing. Conversely, there has been long-term loss of value in other sectors like oil and gas. “We move away from shrinking industries, which rely more on the exploitation of natural capital,” said Mermet. These businesses are not only less sustainable in his view, but face increasing regulatory risks, potential consumer backlash, and therefore declining profit streams. Mega themes “To look for quality, growing companies, we have a rigorous bottom-up stock picking process to find companies that are not only interesting but genuinely good investments,” said Mermet. “We narrow it down on five mega themes designed to last over the next 10 to 30 years. “There is nothing particularly genius about it. This is intentional. These themes are designed to be broad and consistent over time.” The themes are represented in the image below. Source: Sarasin & Partners Important in identifying companies within these themes is also fully integrating ESG analysis into their prospects. “We’ve established that growth is scarce, so for us gaining an in-depth understanding of ESG factors at the least reduces tail risk,” said Mermet. “Our themes are founded on societal and environmental change, and the weaker global GDP growth is, the more important it is to integrate ESG considerations.” Read: Long-term investors now hold sway over ESG ESG is not used simply as a filter but also as a way to evaluate potential value that could be unlocked. “We don’t just focus on the highest-rated companies,” said Mermet. “We try to capture the upside from potential ESG upgrades as we believe there is a great deal of value to be found in the transition to a more sustainable economy.” Patrick Cairns is South Africa editor at Citywire, which provides insight and information for professional investors globally. This article was first published on Citywire South Africa here, and is republished with permission.