The past seven months have crippled the economy, taking it far beyond its already precarious pre-Covid-19 levels and resulting in growing calls for the government to accelerate economic growth. For this to be achieved there needs to be responsible investing by both the public and private sectors. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. So states a report – Making Better Decisions: Impact Measurement and Management in SA – published by Impact Investing South Africa (IISA), which is led by the Wits Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results for Anglophone Africa (Clear-AA) and the UCT Bertha Centre for Social Innovation and Entrepreneurship at the UCT Graduate School of Business. Impact investments are made into companies, organisations and funds with the intention of generating a measurable social and environmental impact alongside a financial return. It follows a philosophy that companies should consider broader issues other than shareholder’s concerns when it comes to investing. Society required a crisis such a Covid-19 to pull it into action, says IISA chair Elias Masilela. Working together “As it stands, we have to act decisively and in unity or run the risk of falling over. That means [the] public and private sector working together with clear measurable goals, accountable to the electorate, members, beneficiaries, clients, each other.” Masilela says the trust needed to facilitate this process is usually earned incrementally over time. He adds however that there are foundational pieces of market infrastructure that can help to determine intentionality, mitigate risk and account for the impact, which in turn can accelerate deployment of capital into the necessary developmental areas. Read: Covid-19 market crash: Lessons for investors “Let us use this crisis to provide a gateway to a more stable prosperous society for all our citizens,” he says. Another IISA member, Wits Clear-AA co-lead Dugan Fraser, says South Africa needs to adopt international standards in order to achieve impact investment. “The SA approach is to draw off what is being done and learnt internationally and to apply it thoughtfully and sensitively to the local context, in a way that makes the most sense to specific practitioners in all parts of the system,” he says. “Rather than prescribing a fixed approach to the measurement and management of impact investment we are seeking to provide a carefully curated toolbox that can be drawn upon and applied by providers, users and evaluators of impact investments,” Fraser says. Fraser says this toolbox needs to be prepared through a collaborative and inclusive process involving a wide range of stakeholders. Challenges The report states that challenges can be captured in four areas: It says there is a lack of common language among business practitioners that has resulted in poor understanding of the business cases. “A commonly identified challenge among practitioners is that definitions are inconsistent, and terms are used interchangeably which causes a mismatch in understanding.” This has led to a lack of buy-in from senior management who are not convinced of value add and are put off by the apparent complexity. “This has the potential to undermine investor confidence in the performance data being produced. This has further knock-on effects causing proliferation of bespoke indicator sets and reduced potential to compare data.” It notes the lack of senior level buy-in in decision-making because of a lack of external investor and client support due to lack of knowledge resulting in a lack of inclination and resources. “It seems that few local LPs [limited partnerships] are currently asking for impact data outside of job creation. There are early signals that this is changing as climate change, Covid-19 and the millennial generation demand more from the financial sector.” Data collection is considered time consuming and expensive. “There are certain investees that cannot afford it such as SMEs and municipalities. In addition, not all practitioners reported to having the skills in house to be able to collect and analyse data.” There is a lack of comparability in the market and weak coordination between institutions, which reduces peer-to -peer learning and competition. It was observed that there is a spectrum along which investors tend to integrate impact into investment decisions. On the strategic side, seasoned impact investors such as DFIs [development finance institutions] speak of business as usual as an end-to-end process where the impact is built into every part of the investment process.