“No matter where we start, we make sure that the end is always better than the beginning.” – Kimi Makwetu. Auditor-General (AG) Kimi Makwetu is completing his seventh year as AG, and that after seven years as deputy AG. There are not many state institutions that have managed to grow someone within the organisation. He will be stepping down in November. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Under his watch, the Public Audit Act was amended to provide the Auditor-General of South Africa (AGSA) with additional powers, i.e. to: Makwetu was the winner of the 2019 Association for the Advancement of Black Accountants of Southern Africa (Abasa) Presidential Award for Lifetime Achievement. AGSA should also receive a prize for being the first state institution to publish its integrated annual report for the financial year ended March 30, 2020. The AG provided value-added auditing by: Makwetu identified key issues in his message Accounting officers and authorities of public institutions are expected to prevent and detect non-compliance, fraud, theft and breaches of the fiduciary duty of care. Preventative control should be introduced. The executive authorities must set the tone for consequence management by investigating and dealing with any allegations of financial misconduct and irregularities by accounting officers and authorities. Building reserves The focus on cost optimisation, instituting a head count moratorium, renegotiating leases, and intensifying debt collection, among other initiatives, has enabled AGSA to accumulate a year-end cash reserve of R674 million. Debt owed to the AGSA is R931 million, an increase of 25%, with local government owing 42% of the whole. Developing human capital AGSA is: Conditions under which AGSA operates Year after year AGSA comes across internal control environments that are inadequately managed, weak preventative controls and the disregard of AGSA’s audit reports. Collecting outstanding debt from local government and ailing state-owned entities (SOEs) remains a challenge. Material irregularities (MIs) detected in auditees AGSA is operating in an increasingly difficult and dangerous environment, and there have been instances of auditors receiving threats and intimidation. Measures also have to be taken to protect data from cyber breaches. Possibly the greatest threat to AGSA however, is the nonchalance with which government as the stakeholder reads adverse audit reports on SOEs and municipal and provincial bodies.