Contrary to popular opinion, this is not the messiest environment for a US general election (they’ve had them during the civil war, the Spanish Flu and the Great Depression) but it ranks high! In SA, we’re at risk of getting polarised coverage of those elections. Before 1994, The Republicans got the one-sided media coverage by mainstream South African media; after 1994 our mainstream local media has tended to heavily favour Democrats. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. I think it’s relevant to start by noting that American democracy is substantially different to our own, and the mentality of its design is also very different to our own. Our own new democracy was born in an environment of ultimately (relatively) bloodless naïve optimism. In the US, it was born after a savage revolutionary war (eight years of pitched battles) with a group of primary protagonists who were all dodgy, knew each other as all dodgy and (most importantly) treated each other as dodgy. They designed a framework based on a degree of healthy mutual scepticism.  The result is a framework that is more complicated than our own, and ultimately more robust. The US is a Federation of States and therefore its election is not a “national” election, it’s a series of “state” elections. The presidential winner is determined by the electoral college, rather than the national popular vote. Each state has as many “electors” in the Electoral College as it has Representatives and Senators in the United States Congress, and the District of Columbia (Washington) has three electors. Each state gets 2 senators, and then seats in the House of Representatives are split up for population size prorate (approximately 1:710 000). Thus small population states enjoy extra clout in the electoral colleges. Just to be sure so the maths is very clear: 435 electoral college votes per House + 2×50 votes per senate seat + 3 for Washington = 538 across all states. You need 270 electoral college votes to win. The winner of the popular vote in a state receives all of its electoral college votes (except Maine and Nebraska). This means that polls and popularity ratings are imperfect indicators for election forecasting. This was brought into sharp relief in the 2016 election when Hillary Clinton won the popular vote by 2.9million. This was because she enjoyed good turnouts in populous states like California, Illinois and NewYork, but lost traditionally Democrat rustbelt states like Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. Also 3rd party candidates took 5% of the poll. How will policy change under a Biden presidency or a re-elected Trump, and will Covid-19 affect the outcome? While the election is substantially a referendum on Trump’s presidency, there are other permutations such as control of the House of Representatives and Senate. The House reflects the population prorate, while the Senate is equal weighted by states (each state elects 2 senators). Congressmen serve two-year terms, while senators serve six years. (Simplistically, the House initiates legislation while Senate vets it). These permutations affect a president’s scope to manoeuvre. Of course, by infecting Trump the impact of Covid just got a bit personal – more on that further down. So what are the main battlefield issues? Simplistically then the battlefield is Tax, Health and International Relations. Many market observer’s would be tempted to blame Trump over the Sino-US trade war, in reality Hillary Clinton was also pro-trade war. In some ways the Chinese could well prefer a Republican win since Democrats are more likely to make an issue of human rights and enlist the help of allies. Then again, the Democrats may be more diplomatic in their conduct of a dispute. So who is the likelier winner? Since 1900, only 5 of 15 incumbents lost re-election bids (favours Trump). Smaller, rural states have a larger share of electoral college votes than population (favours Trump). Economic performance matters enormously, Trump’s advantage in this regard has faded due to Covid, so how the re-opening proceeds will be important. His abrasive and blustery manner has not been an asset to presidential popularity – Trump has a low overall and swing-state approval rating. That said, Trump’s base is narrow but solid and likely to
turn out; turnout is less certain for the Democrats, but their pool wider. Kamala Harris for vice-president reflects a choice to widen that turnout. Swing voters are key. Covid is a wildcard; re-opening can spur resurgences, either through potential “second waves” next winter or rolling breakouts. It also threw in wildcard value by infecting Trump. Could it also cause further unsettlement by infecting either Biden, Mike Pence or Kamala Harris? The electoral college structure means that there are marginal (“swing”) vote areas that matter disproportionately. These are Florida (29 electoral votes), Pennsylvania (20), Ohio (18), Michigan (16), North Carolina (15), Arizona (11) and Wisconsin (10). Florida is always important, but Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin may again determine the result. Polls in Florida, Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin by Real Clear Politics (polls) and Predictit Markets both indicate a firm lead to Biden. According to 270towin.com the Democrats have 188 safe seats and the Republicans have 88 safe seats. The Republicans must win all the toss-up states to win (which feat Trump achieved in 2016). The following graph was published by Blackrock in an investment note using data from polling site FiveThirtyEight.com: Sources: BlackRock Investment Institute, with data from FiveThirtyEight, September 2020. Notes: Orange = advantage of Biden over Trump in national polls. The yellow line shows Biden’s average advantage in six decisive states: Arizona, Florida, Michigan, North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. The first presidential debate took place on 29th Sept, and thereafter the next ones are scheduled for the 15th and 22nd October. The UK Times summed up the debate (debacle?) best in my view; “last night was not a debate in any meaningful sense – it was an ill-tempered and at times incomprehensible squabble between two angry septuagenarians who palpably loathe each other”. Perhaps Biden was a slight winner in being able to come through in a pit fight. Of course, Trumps Covid wildcard means that the vice-presidential debate happening next week could assume an unusual degree of importance, both for Mike Pence as prospective acting President and for Kamala Harris as heir presumptive to a relatively elderly candidate. In the contest for the House, it’s already all over bar the shouting for the Democrats; betting odds reflect 1:6 odds for a Dem win, and 7:2 for a Republican win. The Senate is currently held 53-47 by Republicans and there are 35 seats (currently 23-R and 12-D) up for grabs. The betting markets are even odds on Republicans < 50 seats. Betting markets are smart, but certainly not perfect, as both Brexit and Trump 2016 sharply reminded us. Until September 30, Trump took 55% of bets vs 40% for Biden in the last two weeks on my preferred political betting site (the other 5% of the market is made up of outlier candidates) – a pattern for a wildcard win. After the debate debacle, these odds flipped exactly in Bidens favour, and Trumps Covid case extended the trend. The key takeaway from these insights is that while those national polls show Biden with big margins; the race (per that Blackrock chart) is much tighter where it counts (in the swing states). So what is the relative difference between Trump and Biden as far as investment markets are concerned? Markets prefer predictability and continuity (i.e. incumbents) and Trump’s policies of corporate and personal tax cuts and de-regulation are market-friendly. Yet Trump can be disruptive and unpredictable, and often reactive rather than strategic. Biden represents change and is less conventionally market-friendly than Trump but may also be viewed as more predictable, and more inclined to fiscal stimulus to support the economy. Biden is being marketed as a moderate and “safe pair of hands”. He will be less sensitive than Trump to stock markets, but he is a moderate career politician who will not risk the economy. Taxes will go up to satisfy the party and because of longer-term budget considerations. His initial emphasis will be Covid and supporting economic recovery. Thereafter he may seek to repair relations with traditional allies and organisations and reinforce ObamaCare. It is certainly possible that a Biden win would be more positive for
international markets. Could Trump be aggressive on domestic and foreign policy if he wins, or will be more moderate without another election to win? Aggressive policies could include trying to force trade spats with China, Europe, Japan to conclusion, more isolationism and further curtailing of ObamaCare and drug price regulation. His more moderate policies could include an infrastructure program and tax cuts focused on lower- and middle-income groups. Of course the political power cocktail must needs consider Congress. A split government is often considered positive for markets, which likes “constrained” government activity. A sweep (Presidency, House, Senate) by the Democrats could bring forceful change in macro and sector policies, while a Republican sweep would bring aggressive extension of current policies. The historic outcomes on the market are actually slightly in favour of Dem presidents over Republican, equivalent in the case of clean sweeps either way, slightly favourable to a Republican congress and generally unfavourable to a “split” Congress (i.e. House and Senate under different leadership). Capital markets would probably prefer a Trump victory, especially if Democrats retain the House. Markets can live with Biden, but may be nervous about a Dem sweep. All things considered this doesn’t look like an election in which a clear result would significantly affect the markets. Indeed, the result for markets to truly fear is “no result”. Markets did not enjoy the last significant electoral stand-off experienced in Florida in 2000 over voting machines and markets are potentially more fragile this time (notwithstanding the cocktail of monetary opiates that have supercharged markets during the Covid crisis). Make no mistake, “no result” is dangerous to markets. My favourite betting market may be suggesting a quick result on its odds. The results date betting has 03rd Nov at 4:1, 4th Nov at 5:4, 5-8th Nov at 7:2 and 9th + Nov at 27:10 BUT the latter 2 date groupings comprise 85% of bets in this category. Bottom line: there is definite surprise possibility in “no result”. Still – I’ve seen several fund managers referring to the “no result” possibility, which suggests that perhaps it is beginning to feature in the overall market price picture. However, as the Covid crash in March reminded us – “halfbaked” and “fully cooked” are not the same thing for equity prices!! The spectre of “no result” has gained traction through the issue of mail voting. As outsiders, we might consider the practice strange. Nevertheless the howls of outrage from Trump seem disingenuous when you consider the following notes from October 2017 we found on the US election Assessment Commission website: The change over time in mail voting is reflected in the following graphic from EAC.gov:  If Trump was that concerned about the threat to democracy from postal voting, he has had plenty of time to raise and address the matter. We would be remiss in not considering the implications of Trumps Covid case. Clearly it restricts his ability to physically campaign. His party will have to go into overdrive to compensate. His offset will have to be ferocious campaigning online – and he will only be truly effective in that domain if he proves to be asymptomatic. It certainly does mean that there will be more focus on the Vice-Presidential candidates. We should also note the possibility of a Boris Johnson style sympathy effect – his popularity went up after he got sick from it – even though he had initially advocated a herd immunity stance to the pandemic. Note that the Boris Johnson pre and post Covid was not the same Prime Minister, his stance on heath certainly softened. So while a knee jerk response might be that this just improved odds for the Democrats and reduced the risk of a “no result” deadlock, nothing should be taken for granted! On the face of it, like an apprentice that has run out of excuses, Trump looks set to be told “You’re fired!” However this election is probably not over until either the Supreme Court or Congress and all State Governors stamp it! Reference was made to MRB Research, Blackrock Institute, fivethirtyeight and Geopolitical Futures. Warwick Lucas and Theo Vorster of Galileo Asset Managers and Galileo Capital.