The European Union has smashed global records and it’s barely started issuing debt. It racked up the biggest orderbook in history this week, with 233 billion euros ($275 billion) of demand for its first-ever social bonds. That foray tapped into the fastest growing part of sustainable finance, where investors just can’t get enough and the EU offered the biggest deal so far. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Now the question is whether demand for the EU’s joint securities will extend beyond this niche hot market, given its plans to issue up to a trillion euros of debt to recover from the coronavirus. Similar levels of interest for its conventional and green bonds, due from next year, could give it assets that can ultimately rival US Treasuries on the world stage. This is “a strong start for the EU’s multi-year mission,” said Konstantin Veit, senior portfolio manager in European government bonds at Pacific Investment Management Co.  With this week’s deal alone, the bloc has managed to finance nearly a fifth of its 100-billion-euro pandemic job-support program. John Taylor, a money manager at AllianceBernstein, was one of those to snap up both the 10-year and 20-year social debt at Tuesday’s sale. He sees the securities as an attractive alternative to other European bond markets. On top of that, the European Central Bank is able to buy up to 50% of the bloc’s issuance, more than for national markets, providing a guaranteed backstop. “Investors look at the quantitative-easing commitment and are expecting that it gets extended,” he said. That policy support will also cover the rest of the EU’s bond issuance, the bulk of which is set to start next year, should member states sign off on the details of a proposed 750-billion-euro recovery fund. Success would deepen its economic integration by sharing debt burdens that have been fractured along national borders up to now. These are just the latest factors helping build confidence in the bloc’s stability and assets, according to Peter Chatwell, head of multi-asset strategy at Mizuho International Plc. He sees the joint debt issuance helping the euro climb to a six-year high of $1.30 in 2021. “Europe has an extremely cheap currency, a much improved fiscal framework and pseudo fiscal union, a central bank which now understands the importance of its monetary policy in reducing euro-area imbalances, and it now has a bond market which is growing in size,” said Chatwell. Pimco’s Veit said these new EU securities look set to trade at a similar level to France’s debt, considered a relative haven within the region’s bonds. France is effectively paid to borrow from markets, with a 10-year yield of minus 0.33%. Such levels being extended to joint debt could ease one of the biggest problems in the euro area — that the region’s most indebted nations have to borrow at the highest costs. Investors fear that they could one day tumble out of the euro area, creating strong demand for scarce German debt seen as safer. Yet since the pandemic lockdowns in March, bonds from Europe’s periphery have surged thanks to the ECB’s asset buying and the prospect of the recovery fund. Yields on Spanish and Portuguese 10-year debt now hover just above 0%, while those on their Italian peers touched a record low last week. Even Greece — rated junk — can borrow at less than 1%. The temporary EU effort to raise debt to deal with the coronavirus is expected to become permanent as time goes by, said Peter de Coensel, a money manager at Degroof Petercam Asset Management SA in Brussels. The key challenge for the EU now is how to build out a deep enough market across a range of products, including conventional bonds, green securities and social assets. Union Investment’s head of fixed income Christian Kopf suggested that it may need to conduct auctions and build up a debt management office in much the same way that nations do. “We view the EU as a euro rates benchmark name for the future,” said Mizuho’s Chatwell.