Traders across the world may be coming around to the idea that the US election isn’t going to be the tumultuous event it was once expected to be. But the real believers seem to be in emerging markets. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Optimism that the November election result will go uncontested and speculation a US stimulus package will be agreed whatever the outcome are damping concern about fluctuations through year-end. Yet, while US VIX futures declined last week as bets on likely price volatility eased, the drop for emerging markets was more pronounced. “It does appear that emerging-market investors are slightly more sanguine about risks through the end of the year than what you’re seeing in developed markets,” said Nick Stadtmiller, a strategist at Medley Global Advisors in New York. “As long as global liquidity remains ample, and as long as global markets at least hold their ground, I would expect emerging-market assets to perform well. Yields on many emerging-market assets are high, especially relative to rock-bottom yields on developed market assets.”  Falling volatility may give investors more confidence to put cash into an asset class enjoying one of its best phases since the virus-induced global sell-off in March. Citigroup Inc. said last week the worst is over for developing-nation assets and Morgan Stanley is betting volatility will continue to ease as the outcome of the November vote becomes clearer. Emerging-market equities and currencies climbed to an eight-month high on Friday, while local-currency bonds had their best week since May on the prospect of US fiscal stimulus. One-month implied volatility on the Brazilian real, South African rand and Russian ruble fell by the most among peers last week, signaling improved appetite for risk assets. “The markets are positioned themselves for a fresh dose of fiscal stimulus and former VP Biden winning the election and on the top of that Democrats regaining control over Senate,” said Piotr Matys, a strategist at Rabobank in London. “Even if there is no agreement ahead of November 3, the markets know that it is just a matter of time when a fiscal package will be implemented.” The yuan led emerging-market currencies lower on Monday after China’s policy makers acted to restrain a rally in the currency by removing rules that made betting against the currency expensive. Financial institutions will no longer need to set aside cash when purchasing foreign exchange for clients through onshore currency forwards, effective from Monday, the People’s Bank of China said on the weekend. The official fixing rate was less weak than some traders has feared, despite being below Bloomberg consensus. Past rule changes have tended to see greater divergences of the fixing from expectations and were generally accompanied by intervention. The yuan remains on course to strengthen, with moves to make it cheaper to short the currency only blunting the rally in the short term, according to HSBC. China will publish trade data on Tuesday. The healthy trade surplus has been part of the strong yuan story, and consensus forecasts predict another 10% year-on-year increase in exports to leave the surplus near $60 billion. Inflation data are due on Thursday. The headline rate is expected to dip below 2% year-over-year for the first time since February 2019. Monetary data are due sometime in the week. Aggregate financing is expected to show a slowdown from the rapid clip last month. Bank Indonesia’s rate decision comes on Tuesday. Consensus heavily favors no change as policy makers seek to protect the rupiah. However, the acute need for domestic stimulus, plus the fact that headline inflation has been below the central bank’s target range for five months may mean that a cut is considered. The rupiah appreciated by more than 1% last week, and is currently comfortably stronger than the central bank’s perceived stress point of 15,000 per dollar. On Thursday, Indonesia will report September trade numbers. A continuation of the Covid-induced import slump should keep the trade account in surplus. Bank of Korea meets Wednesday and is unanimously expected to stand pat. With rates close to the effective lower bound, the hurdle to further easing is high. Korea won one-month NDFs posted Asia’s strongest performance last week as odds shifted more decisively toward a Joe Biden election victory and yuan appreciation spilled over. The Monetary Authority of Singapore meets Wednesday. Consensus also favors no change. In much of Asia, central bank intervention decisions are influenced by the trade-weighted exchange rate and the economic cycle. Therefore MAS’s forward-looking policy setting approach can influence perceptions of the most highly cyclical Asian currencies –- such as the won, Taiwan dollar, Malaysian ringgit and Thai baht. Chile’s central bank is expected to keep its key rate at 0.50% on Thursday, and refrain from announcing new quantitative-easing measures, according to Bloomberg Economics. The peso was the best-performing emerging-market currency last quarter, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. Uganda will also decide on monetary policy on Thursday, and Sri Lanka on Friday. Malaysia’s industrial output barely grew in August, according to data from the Department of Statistics. The ringgit weakened for the first time in three days on Monday. On Monday, India releases September CPI data. The outcome is expected to remain above the Reserve Bank of India’s 6% year-over-year tolerance for the sixth month. This has prevented the RBI from making the rate cuts the economy needs, and has apparently increased its tolerance for rupee appreciation. Industrial production for August is also due Monday, and is expected to show a continued steep year-over-year decline. September trade balance will be reported Thursday. The rupee was little changed last week, making it Asia’s laggard after the central bank on Friday signaled more policy easing ahead and announced a slew of liquidity steps to support an economy. The Monetary Policy Committee retained the benchmark repurchase rate at 4%, as expected, while keeping its policy stance accommodative, implying it could ease again. The Philippines’ remittance growth numbers for August are scheduled to be released on Thursday. Consensus expects growth of roughly 5% year-over-year. The peso’s 0.3% gain last week was the second least among emerging-Asian currencies. Turkey’s current account remained in deficit for a ninth month as the trade balance deteriorated and the coronavirus-related tourism slump deepened; it will publish industrial production data Tuesday. The lira is the worst performer in emerging markets this month, even after the central bank unexpectedly hiked its one-week repo rate by 200 basis points in September and authorities unwound a number of trading restrictions on the currency. Mounting geopolitical risks have weighed on the currency. Turkey plans to hold a four-day firing exercise around its Black Sea coast this week, which might include a test of its Russian-made S-400 missile-defense system. Russia conceded a three-day-old truce it brokered between Azerbaijan and Armenia isn’t holding yet, as the two warring sides traded accusations of responsibility for fresh clashes in the Nagorno-Karabakh region. Turkey has backed Azerbaijan in the conflict. Poland presents its August current-account balance on Wednesday, followed on Thursday by the flash CPI reading for September, and by last month’s core CPI print on Friday. Russia may report year-to-date budget balance; also September industrial production, producer prices on Thursday and Friday. South African factory output contracted for a fifteenth month in August even as coronavirus-lockdown measures were eased allowing activity to resume in the sector. Mining production will be released on Tuesday, followed by retail sales Wednesday and second-quarter non-farm payrolls Thursday. A reading of Argentina’s September inflation, scheduled for Wednesday, will probably show an annual decrease, according to economists surveyed by Bloomberg. The nation is also expected to release budget balance data this week. Bloomberg Economics recommends watching the central bank as it tries to stem the depletion of international reserves. Mexican industrial production data for August declined 9% from a year ago despite a small recovery from earlier in 2020. The Mexican peso has outperformed all of its peers this month as investors bet that increased stimulus under a Biden presidency will help boost exports to the US. In Brazil, investors will watch August economic activity figures on Thursday for signs of a rebound in gross domestic product in the third quarter. The nation may also seek to stifle any debate over the government’s new social program and spending cap until after local elections in mid-November. The real was the biggest gainer in emerging markets last week. A reading of Peru’s August economic activity gauge on Thursday will probably flag an even deeper contraction than a month earlier, according to economists surveyed by Bloomberg. Colombia is expected to post retail sales numbers on Thursday that may give money managers more insight into the nation’s consumer appetite amid the pandemic.