The Association for Savings and Investment South Africa (Asisa) has taken note of the most recent attempt by the South African Institute of Race Relations (IRR) to once again draw Asisa members into the prescription debate. This seems to be a deliberate endeavor by the IRR to stir up panic amongst South African investors during a time when calm and rationality is needed more than ever. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. In recent months the various social partners of the National Economic Development and Labour Council (Nedlac), namely government, labour, business and community, tabled their economic recovery plans and not a single one mentioned the prescription of assets as a possible solution. It needs to be noted that not even the ANC discussion document on economic recovery mentioned prescription of assets as an option that should be considered. Read: ANC’s proposals to change Reg 28 ready by mid-September Proposals to amend Regulation 28 of the Pension Fund Act to include a separate category for retirement funds to invest in infrastructure assets do not equate to prescription. The most recent accusation by the IRR, sent to a number of Asisa members, that “initial attempts at constructive and frank engagement have been less than satisfactory, raising concerns as to whether financial and corporate entities are taking the matter of asset prescription as government policy seriously” is disingenuous. Asisa, on behalf of its members, provided the IRR with a comprehensive written response in July last year addressing the same concerns about prescription that are now being raised again. Read: Tripartite Alliance moots prescribed assets, self reliance Asisa response to the IRR on prescription
For the public record, and for the benefit of all concerned South Africans, Asisa would like to summarise the points raised with the IRR on July 24, 2019: The fact that we do not believe that there is an imminent threat does not equate to ignorance. Asisa’s views on Regulation 28 Regulation 28 exists to prevent an undue concentration of assets and illiquid assets from being included in the investment portfolios of retirement funds, thereby placing the long-term investment outcomes for retirement fund members at risk. Since 2011, Regulation 28 has permitted retirement fund to invest up to 35% of their portfolios in unlisted assets within the following limitations: Retirement funds are not the only investors in infrastructure projects. Seed funding for infrastructure projects is generally provided by the banks and development finance institutions (DFIs), who take their return and exit once a project is up and running. If the project is viable and attractive, life insurers and other investors come in by buying equity and providing additional loan capital to replace the money provided by the banks. Read:
Prescribed assets not necessarily a train wreck
Prescribed assets is not the answer – Alexander Forbes Developing investable infrastructure projects
Asisa and its members have always maintained that they are willing to support bankable infrastructure projects. To this end Asisa has been engaging with various parts of government over the past eight years towards creating an enabling environment for the private sector to assist government in the financing of infrastructure. The formation of the Investment and Infrastructure Office (IIO) in the Presidency (soon to become Infrastructure South Africa), headed by Dr Kgosientsho Ramokgopa, has been able to remove many of the blockages that previously hampered infrastructure investment in South Africa. The first tangible delivery has been the recent gazetting of strategic infrastructure projects worth R340 billion. For the first time infrastructure projects are being coordinated from one central point, which has facilitated a streamlined and efficient process. Asisa and the banks are working closely with the IIO to help capacitate the office with skills. In conclusion: Leon Campher is CEO of ASISA Listen: Enoch Godongwana tells Ryk van Niekerk that prescribed assets won’t be used to bail out struggling SOEs 