Oil retreated in New York after President Donald Trump said he’s halting stimulus talks until after the election and as an industry report signalled US crude stockpiles rose for the first time in four weeks. Futures declined 2% after climbing almost 10% in the previous two sessions. Trump told his negotiators to stop discussions with Democratic leaders just hours after Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell stepped up his call for more spending to avoid damaging the economic recovery. Meanwhile, the American Petroleum Institute reported crude inventories expanded by 951 000 barrels last week, according to people familiar. Government data is due Wednesday. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Oil has whipsawed the past few days, sliding after Trump’s Covid-19 diagnosis before surging on his release from hospital and optimism a stimulus package might be completed. While prices are back below $40 a barrel due to rising supply and a resurgence in infections, a strike in Norway and a hurricane that’s approaching the Gulf of Mexico are likely to provide some support. “A fiscal package would give investors confidence and the fact that it wasn’t delivered raises the risk that the US economy could stall,” said Vivek Dhar, a commodities analyst at Commonwealth Bank of Australia. Global oil and product stockpiles remain elevated and will limit price gains until they fall, he added. Prices West Texas Intermediate for November delivery lost 82 cents to $39.85 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange as of 12:02 p.m. Singapore time after rising 3.7% on Tuesday Brent for December settlement slid 1.7% to $41.93 on the ICE Futures Europe exchange after adding 3.3% in the previous session
Stocks tumbled after Trump called an end to months of hard-fought negotiations between the administration and Congress. Earlier, Fed Chair Powell warned of a weak US recovery without sufficient government aid and said providing too much stimulus wouldn’t be a problem. Meanwhile, US gasoline and distillate inventories fell last week, while crude stockpiles at the storage hub of Cushing rose, according to the API. Energy Information Administration data is forecast to show nationwide crude stockpiles slid by 1.2 million barrels, according to a Bloomberg survey. In a sign of recovering strength in the physical market, Saudi Arabia slightly raised the cost of its flagship Arab Light crude shipped to Asia. The increase in November pricing marks a change in course for the world’s biggest exporter after it pared prices in September and October as crude use stagnated. Other oil-market news: © 2020 Bloomberg