The Gautrain has announced its service times for consumers travelling to and from work on Monday. Operating hours for the train service have been revised following a threat to strike by the National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (Numsa) on Friday. The change in operating times cames as union and management failed to reach a resolution on the wage dispute. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Read: Gautrain services come to a standstill on Monday The Bombela Operations Company, which manages the Gautrain, offered the workers a non-negotiable 4.1% increase, while Numsa is demanding 8%. Trains every 30 minutes during peak periods Gautrain spokesperson Kesagee Nayager said that during the morning and afternoon peak periods on Monday, trains will be available every 30 minutes on both the North-South and East-West lines. The morning peak period is between 05:30 and 09:00 and the afternoon peak period is between 15:00 and 19:00. “In order to ensure that enough capacity is available, all trains operating in the peak periods will be eight-car trains. Services during the off-peak [period] will be confirmed early on Monday morning,” Nayager said. She added that the bus and midibus service will not be affected by the strike and will operate as per the standard schedule. “Whilst we respect worker’s right to strike within the framework of the Labour Relations Act, striking workers must equally respect that their colleagues also have a right to work without intimidation,” Nayager said. Nayager said the Gautrain apologises in advance for the inconveniences and passengers will be kept informed of any changes in this regard. Additional security measures have been implemented on the Gautrain system to ensure the safety of the passengers.