One thing about the global Covid-19 pandemic is that it has proven that there is an urgent need for more affordable mobile data networks. People have been forced to work from home and study from home for about eight months, because of the Covid-19 induced lockdowns. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. As a result, on Tuesday Pick n Pay announced during its interim results for the six months ended August 30, 2020 that it will be launching a Pick n Pay mobile and Boxercom, under its Boxer chain. Currently, South Africa has five major mobile networks. Pick n Pay’s Chief Executive officer,  Richard Brasher explained that supplying data is the only sensible direction that the supermarket can take in the face-off Covid-19. “In the spirit of innovation, I would also like to announce that we intend to launch Pick n Pay mobile and Boxercom in the not so distant future. There is no doubt, we all know that data is the option of individuals and communities now,” says Brasher. Brasher pointed out that the younger generation also spends more time on their mobile phones using data rather than making phone calls prior to the pandemic. “Data is now the crucial alexia of life. I think it is important because it has helped people be connected, during the course of this pandemic, with friends and family. It is important for education and it is important for entertainment,” says Brasher. Brasher explains that when customers shop at their stores they will receive more data for less, “ and on occasions for free”. Pick n Pay’s did not say much more on the issue only saying that it plans to launch it in the near future. Online stores Chairman Gareth Ackerman says that it has also seen an increased demand in its online sales during the lockdown period. “Expansion of South Africa’s leading online grocery channel by introducing on-demand and Click-and-Collect services to meet significantly increased demand during the lockdown,” Ackerman says. He says that their online team worked almost without rest to its footprint and delivery slots to keep pace with demand. “Our customers responded extremely well to the measures we put in place to keep them safe,” Ackerman says. He added that Click n Collect services to meet significantly increased demand during the lockdown. “We also responded well to the surge in demand for online shopping.  Pick n Pay Online is the largest online grocery offer in sub-Saharan Africa. We were also the first retailer to launch an on-demand app via partnership with Bottles, converting it from an online liquor platform into a grocery app in just four days,” Ackerman says. Pick n Pay Online now covers more than 150 stores nationwide. It had also launched a Pick n Pay launched an online clothing platform in August. “With strong performance to date exceeding our expectations. The Group opened 11 new clothing
stores during the period and closed six underperforming stores”. “The Group is confident of the opportunity to grow its clothing business through targeted investment in stand-alone clothing stores, additional space in hypermarkets and supermarkets and an expanding digital reach,” Ackerman says. Pick n Pay Online food and grocery services was launched in 2001. The investment in its digital platform and mobile technology has delivered double-digit growth in online sales each year for the past five years. “This provided the Group with a keen competitive advantage going into the Covid-19 crisis,” Ackerman says. New purchase Pick n Pay had announced yesterday morning that it would be finalising to purchase the grocery service App Bottles, by November. Bottles was launched in 2016 as South Africa’s first alcohol on-demand delivery app and partnered with Pick n Pay in 2018. It was the first App to promise delivery within 60 minutes. As the global pandemic gripped South Africa and led to its Lockdown at the end of March, Bottles re-purposed its app within four days, emerging with a new offer to deliver on-demand “Grocery Essentials” to customers. The giant retail store says since its move to groceries on March 31, the app has achieved more than 700 000 downloads, with more than 350 000 registered users.  The service offers over 7 000 products at store prices, with an average delivery time of 90 minutes. Rights obtained The supermarket also announced that it has concluded a consent agreement with the Competition Commission which, after a suitable transitional period on obtaining all the rights to the shopping centres by the end of December 2026. “We do not agree with the Commission that exclusive leases inhibit competition.  But exclusivity is a diminishing feature of the market, and it is right to bring an end to the debate on this subject so that we can all focus on the work that will need to be done. We all need to stimulate enterprise and create jobs after the devastation wreaked by Covid-19,” Ackerman says. 