Stock futures advanced and the dollar fell Thursday on signs of potential progress toward fresh US fiscal stimulus. The offshore yuan climbed, though holidays in Asian markets risked amplifying moves. In Japan, the Tokyo Stock Exchange halted trading after its worst breakdown, exacerbating an already slow day for stock markets in Asia where China, Hong Kong, Taiwan and South Korea are closed for holidays. Shares in Australia and Singapore rose more than 1%. S&P 500 and European futures edged higher. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. A report said Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin bolstered the assistance previously offered by Republican negotiators. Mnuchin earlier said there had been no agreement on pandemic relief, though negotiations would continue. Treasury yields were steady.  Mnuchin said he and Nancy Pelosi “made a lot of progress in a lot of areas,” and the House speaker said talks with the Treasury secretary will continue. Mitch McConnell was pessimistic, saying the two sides remain “far apart” on the amount of spending. The Democrats will nevertheless vote on their $2.2 billion proposal later in the day, although it has no chance in the Senate. President Donald Trump signed a stopgap funding bill, preventing a partial federal government shutdown. Plans to cut jobs at companies from Goldman Sachs Group Inc. to Walt Disney Co. highlighted this week the ongoing fragility for businesses still adjusting to the pandemic. New Jersey reported a rise in virus cases and the National Football League postponed a game for the first time after nine members of the Tennessee Titans were infected. In the Netherlands, the government urged citizens to wear masks amid further restrictions and the Czech Republic issued a 30-day state of emergency to stem a surge in cases. “We’re looking at a volatile October coming into the elections,” Mariann Montagne, portfolio manager at Gradient Investments LLC, said on Bloomberg TV. “The dollar will continue to pullback a bit and that’s a function of the volatility here, the relative growth here versus abroad and there was actually some short covering that took place recently to give it some strength, but that was temporary.” Here are some key events coming up: These are the main moves in markets: