If it wasn’t such a serious matter, putting hundreds of millions of shareholder value at risk, the ongoing restatement of PPC’s financial statements would be hilarious in a grim Monty Python sort of way. Read: SA’s biggest cement maker PPC delays earnings again There’s no doubt the application of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) has made life much more difficult for auditors – and in most cases, unnecessarily so – but the auditing profession is going to have to up its game if it wants the public to continue to take it seriously enough to pay its steep fees. The cover page of PPC’s most recently available annual financial statements – for the period to end-March 2019 – is tagged “in pursuit of sustainable stakeholder value”. Within weeks of the release of these statements this tag must have seemed deeply ironic. Will anyone take responsibility for all the restatements? The directors? The chief financial officer? Or the external auditors, who happen, yet again, to be Deloitte. Not just an “Oops, we got it wrong” apology but an “Oops, we got it wrong and here are our fees back” apology. At 58c the PPC share price is a shadow of where it was trading several years ago, and is at a significant discount to its net asset value. Judging by what happened over at Tongaat, Deloitte is set to get paid substantially more money this year just to ensure the 2020 accounts are more accurate. Not bullet-proof, just more accurate. Rule makers, rule breakers On the subject of corporates behaving badly, JP Morgan’s $920 million record-breaking penalty is a reminder to us all that even the really big guys, who generally make the rules, believe they can break those same rules. The penalty, paid to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, relates to eight years spent manipulating the precious metals and US Treasury securities markets. Lest you’ve forgotten, in August 2019 JP Morgan boss Jamie Dimon led the powerful US business lobby group Business Roundtable in declaring that the purpose of the corporate is not just to serve shareholders but “to create value for all our stakeholders”. Details of the extent of the manipulation support the view of cynics that last August’s statement was nothing more than an attempt by big US business to delay tough new regulations intended to rein in their generally unfettered power. Net1 and CPS Not quite in the ‘big business’ league, Net1 must be thrilled it can walk away from its wholly owned subsidiary Cash Paymaster Services and its very dark past. Read: CPS: Liquidation won’t be opposed by parent company Net1 Last week interim CEO Alex Smith confirmed that Net1 has had no control over CPS since the commencement of business rescue proceedings earlier this year. This means the application, brought by the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa), to liquidate CPS will have little bearing on Net1, says Smith. Despite his dismissal of the liquidation application, shareholders seemed unhappy about the news with the share price slumping almost 10% on Friday. Wanting to put some distance between Net1 and CPS’s dark Sassa-related past might also explain why former Net1 CEO Herman Kotze has exited the group. The new management team, presumably influenced by Value Capital Partners, wants Net1 to focus on consumer and merchant financial services. VCP spent around R580 million earlier this year building up a 13.4% stake in Net1, making it the second-largest shareholder in the controversial company. They paid between R47 and R66 for the shares and are now the second-largest shareholder, behind the World Bank’s International Finance Corporation, which has a 17.65% stake. VCP chair Anthony Ball, whose links with Net1 go back a long way, is evidently not as skittish as other investors and was a steady buyer of Net1 shares last week. Meanwhile Ball’s colleague Sam Sithole, who is CEO of VCP, is taking advantage of the knock-down prices created by Covid 19 and stocking up on Sun International shares. These are certainly alluring times for investors with patience and money. Sad reality for Sasol Sadly this is not the case at Sasol, which has run out of money and whose shareholders have run out of patience. This is why it has no choice but to sell 50% of the substance of its Lake Charles Chemical Project for just $2 billion. Read: Sasol to sell Lake Charles stake for R33.38bn The massive project, which appears to be situated in a hurricane alley, cost Sasol $13 billion as well as its reputation as a world-class integrated chemicals and energy company. Shoprite AGM This year’s Shoprite annual general meeting isn’t going to be half the fun it was last year, which is no doubt what the board is hoping for. The announcement that Wendy Lucas-Bull will be taking over as chair from very long-serving Christo Wiese should help to ease the tensions that created an action-packed AGM last year. Lucas-Bull is, well, a safe pair of hands.