The price of new vehicles increased by more than the inflation rate for the second consecutive quarter and consumers are facing the prospects of the rate of increase rising further in coming months. The latest TransUnion SA vehicle price index report released on Thursday revealed that new vehicle prices increased by 7.6% in the third quarter of 2020 from 3.3% in the corresponding quarter in 2019. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
 A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Source: TransUnion Vehicle Pricing Index Q3 2020 (click to enlarge) More to come? TransUnion Africa vice president of auto information solutions Kriben Reddy said on Thursday the latest increase in new vehicle prices follows 10 quarters of vehicle price increases remaining below inflation and “could herald a cycle of further increases”. Reddy stressed that new vehicle pricing in South Africa is not driven by demand. “As around 70% of our vehicles are imported, factors like exchange rates and tax duties play a big part in the price hikes. “The used car market, on the other hand, is entirely-demand driven, so the fact that we’re seeing a rise in the prices of used cars shows a clear increase in demand for second-hand vehicles,” he said. Econometrix chief economist Azar Jammine said the driving force behind new vehicle price increases is without doubt the depreciation of the rand in the first half of the year. ‘Dramatic depreciation’ Jammine said it was a dramatic depreciation, especially in regard to the motor industry related currencies but particularly the euro. He said earlier this year the rand was at around R15 to R16 to the euro but it has been as high as R21, and even with the rand as strong as it is now, it is at around R19.50 to the euro. “So you are looking at a depreciation of up to 20 to 25% of the rand against the automotive exchange rate, the countries from which we import a lot of components. Some of that is feeding through now. “New car inflation could have been a lot higher still, given the extent of the currency depreciation and that is also a function of the fact that demand is so much lower,” he said. New vehicle prices have been increasing despite the decline in sales caused by the impact of the Covid-19 lockdown and the impact the lockdown has had on the financial health of households. Signs of sector resilience in Q3 However, Reddy said the South African car market showed signs of resilience in the third quarter of 2020, bouncing back from an all-time low in the second quarter to record month-on-month increases in the number of new and used cars financed in both August and September. He said despite total financial agreement volumes in the passenger market showing an expected 21% year-on-year decline from the third quarter in 2019, the market overcame rising vehicle prices, difficult trading conditions and uncertainty to record a 35% month-on-month increase in August and 45% in September, albeit off a low base. “This suggests that while challenging times still lie ahead, the industry could be on the road to recovering from the total shutdown caused by the Covid-19 pandemic. “Overall, the global automotive industry has had another challenging quarter. In South Africa, it has been a quarter of gradual recovery in terms of business and consumer confidence, new vehicle sales, finance applications and overall demand. “While the automotive industry is not yet out of the woods, the small gains made towards the end of the quarter off the back of record lows in Q2 is a real positive for the industry,” he said. TransUnion reported that the rate of increase in used vehicle prices rose to 2.3% in the third quarter of 2020 from 1.1% in the same quarter in 2019. It also reported a marginal increase in the used-to-new vehicle ratio from 2.31 used vehicles financed for every new vehicle finance in the third quarter of 2019 to 2.35 used vehicles for every new vehicle financed in the third quarter of 2020. Previously owned vehicles Jammine said used car inflation is probably much lower than new car inflation because of the glut of used cars in the market following the significant defleeting by car rental companies, the fact people are driving less now than before and, from an affordability perspective, a lot small business owners have had to shut down their operations and no longer need a permanent car. Reddy said the make-up of used vehicle sales shows that 36% of vehicles financed are under two years old, with demo models making up 6% of used financed deals. “This indicates consumers are opting for older vehicles as pressure on disposable income increases,” Reddy said. TransUnion reported that the percentage of both new and used cars being financed below R200 000, R200 000 to R300 000 and over R300 000 has moved back towards vehicles priced at over R300 000 in the third quarter of 2020. Reddy said this is the highest level since TransUnion started tracking this information in 2011. Bakkie-buying on the up? “While this could be seen as a positive sign, it is also indicative of segment movements through higher vehicle pricing, premium brand used vehicles financed and a shift of consumers [towards] purchasing bakkies,” he said. Reddy said the fact that interest rates have dropped to an all-time low could assist some consumers from an affordability perspective although lenders facing high delinquency rates will need to manage key metrics to minimise their risk by amending thresholds of loan to value ratios, loan terms and balloon payments. “Consumers and dealers need to be cognisant of the vehicles they purchase or stock, due to defleeting and possible vehicle repossessions as a result of defaults on repayment agreements in the upcoming months,” he said.