European stocks and US futures rose as global markets extended a rally fueled by optimism that American lawmakers will reach a stimulus deal. The Europe Stoxx 600 Index rose 0.7% and the MSCI Asia Pacific Index notched a fourth day of gains. The S&P 500 jumped 1.7% on Wednesday after a barrage of overnight tweets from President Donald Trump advocating a piecemeal approach and Speaker Nancy Pelosi signaled openness to a standalone airline relief bill. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The dollar weakened, which helped boost commodities including oil and gold. Treasury yields were steady.  “While the debate on a fiscal stimulus this side of the election rages on, the real question is whether markets are front running a ‘blue wave’ scenario?” Chris Weston, head of research at Pepperstone Financial in Melbourne, wrote in a note, referring to the possibility of Democrats winning the White House as well as the Senate. Another risk is whether “we will see an ugly contested scenario.” Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee’s Sept. 15-16 meeting released Wednesday showed some US central bankers sought further debate on the future of the Federal Reserve’s asset-purchase program, signaling they’d be open to altering or increasing bond-buying going forward. Meanwhile, countries continue to grapple with rising coronavirus infections. France reported a record number of new cases and Italy’s infections spiked to the highest since April. Regeneron shares gained 3.5% in late trading in New York after President Donald Trump said its an antibody cocktail was was the “key” to his quick recovery. Trump said he would authorise its emergency use. Elsewhere in markets, crop futures are climbing as dry weather threatens planting in the Americas and Black Sea areas. Wheat has risen for five days and is trading near the highest level since 2015. These are some of the main moves in markets: