US equity futures ticked higher and the dollar held gains as investors weighed the impact of President Donald Trump’s barrage of tweets on fiscal stimulus. Asian equities were mixed. S&P 500 futures climbed after the benchmark fell more than 1% overnight on his decision to end negotations until after the election. Fresh comments from Trump calling for support for airlines and the Paycheck Protection Program helped reverse earlier losses. Shares saw gains in Hong Kong and South Korea and fluctuated in Japan. Treasury yields pared overnight declines. Nasdaq contracts had earlier retreated after a House panel proposed a series of far-reaching antitrust reforms to curb the power of US technology giants including Amazon.com and Alphabet Inc. European futures pointed lower. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Elsewhere, Australia’s 3-year bond yield dropped to an all-time low on plans to issue less debt than estimated, while stocks rose after Tuesday’s budget annoucement. Crude oil dropped.  Volatility has picked up this month after Trump contracted the coronavirus and investors weighed the likelihood of a stimulus deal. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi had called on Republicans to get on board with a version of the bill the House passed last week with only Democratic votes. But significant gaps remained between the Democrats’ $2.2 trillion proposal and a $1.6 trillion offer backed by the White House. “The market rally thus far had really been driven by this unprecedented stimulus from both central banks and governments globally and a large part of that was from the US,” Emily Weis, a macro strategist at State Street Corp., said on Bloomberg TV. The timeline on more American fiscal stimulus “has now been pushed further back.” Meanwhile, with Trump now out of hospital investors continue to monitor the virus’s impact on economic recoveries around the world. German new cases jumped the most since April and Italy is set to order stricter rules. Here are some key events coming up: These are some of the main moves in markets: