US equity futures were steady with Treasury yields, while Asian stocks were mixed, as traders digested the final presidential debate and lawmakers in Washington continued to haggle over a spending bill. The dollar edged higher. S&P 500 contracts were little changed while shares in Japan, Hong Kong and South Korea saw modest gains on subdued volumes. Stocks in China and Australia slipped, while European futures pointed higher. President Donald Trump and former Vice President Joe Biden debated topics including the response to Covid-19, immigration policy and health-care reform. The 10-year Treasury yield steadied around 0.85% amid data showing the labor market is still gradually recovering. The euro dipped and the yen ticked higher. Intel Corp. tumbled in after-hours trading after a tepid forecast. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership.  Investors remained finely tuned into developments in Washington, where lawmakers continue to work toward a package to bolster the economy. While House speaker Nancy Pelosi signaled optimism on a deal with the administration, opposition remains in the Republican-controlled Senate, making a pact before the election less likely. “The last presidential debate didn’t really add much in terms of what each would do,” said Shane Oliver, head of investment strategy at AMP Capital Investors Ltd. “But President Trump’s more civil, calm and reasonable approach this time around may work slightly in his favour.” Elsewhere, there is increasing evidence that the pandemic is worsening. German infections have jumped to a record and Spain’s health minister said the spread of coronavirus is out of control in certain parts of the country. US hospitalisations for Covid-19 have reached a two-month high. These are some of the main market moves: