Private equity is defined as capital that is not listed on a public exchange and is composed of funds and investors that directly invest in private companies. Private equity funds invest in businesses that are more established, usually with some profit history. In contrast, while venture capital funds are also not usually listed on a public exchange, the point of difference is that they are usually invested in newer and smaller businesses, often start-ups or tech companies. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. How does a private equity fund work and who is involved? A private equity fund has limited partners (LP), who typically own 99 percent of shares in a fund and has limited liability, and general partner (GP), who owns one percent of shares and have full liability. The GP is also responsible for executing and operating the investment. In most countries the fund structure is either unregulated or very lightly regulated. Although there are industry standards, the holy grail of any fund is the fund documentation (limited partnership agreement) that sets out exactly what the LPs and GP agreed to. The LPs will generally be institutional investors or high net worth individuals that can commit substantial amounts of money to the fund for up to 10 or 12 years. The GP will be responsible for the day-to-day management of the fund and will appoint all the various service providers to assist with the management of the fund. This includes but isn’t limited to: Source: Maitland How does the manager make money? The private equity manager will generally charge two fees to the fund – an annual management fee and a performance fee (called carried interest) that will be paid out based on performance and certain hurdles set in place by the investors. Jacolene Otto is Head of Private Equity & Real Estate at Maitland. This article was first publish on Maitland here and republished with permission.