It is stating the obvious to say that value has not been the best place to be in recent years. “Most of our peers have done a much better job of growing their clients’ wealth through these markets than we have,” said Liam Nunn, part of the value team at Schroders. He was speaking at the recent Allan Gray Orbis Offshore Exchange. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. “But if you share at least some of our concerns around the sustainability of some of the trends we are seeing in markets, we think it’s worth considering the benefit of diversifying your equity exposure.” The ‘death’ of value The performance of value has been so poor for such a long time that many have been prepared to call the style dead. The market, some argue, is now structurally different to when Benjamin Graham wrote The Intelligent Investor. The Schroders value team, however, sounds a word of caution: “There have been plenty of occasions the market believed it knew exactly what the long-term future looked like, only to be tripped up by the inherent messiness of reality,” said Nunn, who co-manages the Schroder ISF Global Recovery. “We are operating in a market today that is taking a very firm view that it knows what the future looks like,” he said. “It is taking a view that it knows who the long-term winners are. “But while this concentration at the top of the index is certainly eye-catching, it’s symptomatic of something deeper and broader. Today, the market is incredibly bifurcated from a fundamental valuation perspective.” The stretched elastic band If the price-to-earnings multiples of the most expensive quintile of global equities is compared against the least expensive quintile of global equities, the difference is greater than it has ever been. “The market is taking a very binary view of the future, at both ends of the valuation spectrum,” said Nunn. Of course, value investors have been saying for a long time that these dynamics are not sustainable, and yet this disparity has continued to widen. However, Nunn said that history is instructive here. “Back in 2000, value as a factor was trailing growth over every time horizon, just as it has today,” he said. “To many market commentators, value had been proven dead. The weight of evidence appeared to have shifted decisively towards a new paradigm of growth investing. “That situation was eerily similar to the one we encounter today. In January 2000 it was extremely difficult for value investors to counter the argument that something had changed. Their long-term performance was terrible. There was no obvious catalyst on the horizon for the market to change its spots. “Yet, just 12 months later, that situation had completely reversed.” Then and now The switch from the expensive parts of the market into the cheaper parts of the market was so swift that in in the space of a year, value was showing historical outperformance over growth for every time period. “The world hadn’t really changed that much,” said Nunn. “Valuation still mattered.” He acknowledged, however, that there is always pushback when drawing comparisons like this with the dotcom bubble. “It’s seen as the last resort of a desperate value manager,” said Nunn. “The argument we’ve heard on many occasions is that this time it’s very different. Back then, people were buying insane IPOs based on eyeballs rather than profit and cashflows. “Today many of the tech disruptors are great franchises, great businesses, and highly profitable. That optically-high valuation dispersion today is therefore a rational reflection of a new economic reality.” How different? However, he said there are two things worth considering. “People remember buying Pets.com on insane metrics, and of course that’s true, but it’s also a slightly distorted view,” said Dunn. “The largest tech businesses in 2000 were not insane concept businesses. They were high quality businesses like Microsoft, Intel, IBM and Cisco. “Those were the biggest weights in the index driving markets. So it wasn’t that the market fell in love with empty, concept stocks, but rather that it hugely overestimated the intrinsic value of businesses like these, despite their quality and growth prospects.” The second is the behavioural element at play. “Even if you exclude the exceptional impact of the big tech winners at the top of the market index, the valuation dispersion is still currently either beyond or close to historical extremes,” said Nunn. “This isn’t something you can explain away as a rational market behaving rationally in the face of the emergence of a few exceptional businesses. “The extreme valuation dispersion we see is not just a function of the market getting overexcited about high growth areas. It is also the cheap parts of the market falling. The elastic band is being pulled from both ends, and that wasn’t necessarily the case 18 months ago.” Optimistic That means there are significant bargains to be found, and gives the Schroders value team reason to be optimistic about the scale of the potential upside in these beaten-up stocks. “Humans are still humans, regardless of the time period,” said Nunn. “Human behaviour is the constant factor that just doesn’t just change very much through time. And we think that lesson holds true for investors. “None of us knows exactly what the future holds, but one thing we can guarantee is we will remain dyed in the wool value investors, come what may. If value doesn’t recover, we will go down with the ship.” Patrick Cairns is South Africa Editor at Citywire, which provides insight and information for professional investors globally. This article was first published on Citywire South Africa here, and is republished with permission.