Asian stocks dipped along with US and European futures Thursday after the chances of a stimulus deal in Washington before next month’s presidential election faded. The dollar and Treasuries ticked higher. Shares in Hong Kong, Japan and South Korea saw the biggest losses, while Australian stocks climbed. US shares retreated Wednesday with Wells Fargo & Co. and Bank of America Corp. both falling after disappointing investors. Goldman Sachs Group Inc. outperformed after earnings beat expectations. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Australian bond yields and the local dollar dropped, and stocks pushed higher, after the Reserve Bank of Australia governor said the central bank is considering whether buying longer-dated bonds would spur hiring. The pound steadied as investors awaited more news on Brexit negotiations. Stocks in Thailand dipped after a state of emergency was declared in Bangkok to crack down on anti-government protesters.  Meantime, China’s central bank added medium-term funding to the financial system as it guides the economy through the pandemic. In the US, Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said getting a stimulus agreement before the election would be difficult, in remarks after another call with House Speaker Nancy Pelosi. While he hoped for bipartisan support for Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s latest idea — a vote on a narrow bill next week to help small businesses — Democratic leaders have no appetite for piecemeal measures now. “This has been an ongoing drama,” said Paul Nolte, portfolio manager at Kingsview Investment Management. “The latest twist I heard is nothing is going to get done until the election. That’s why I think you’re getting the market selling off a little bit.” Europe’s leaders intensified efforts to stem a resurgent coronavirus outbreak across the continent with France announcing stricter measures, Germany warning of economic risks and London set to tighten restrictions. Here are some key events coming up: These are some of the main moves in markets: