More than 75% of South Africans pass away without a valid will in place, causing devastating consequences for their families and dependants. To help combat this statistic, the Law Society of South Africa (LSSA) promotes National wills week, every year, and participating attorneys offer their will-drafting services for basic wills at no cost to clients. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. wills Week is normally in September, but due to Covid-19 and lockdown, the LSSA has officially announced that National wills Week will be from 26 – 30 October this year. Why have a National Wills Week? The reality is that most people know they need a will, but statistics show that South Africans are notorious procrastinators. In a recent survey we conducted, we asked people why they haven’t got their wills in order. The results? So, with more than 75% of South African’s passing away without a will in place, it’s not necessarily an awareness issue – it’s an education issue. People need to know what devastating consequences their families and dependants will face if they were to pass away without a will. In our business, we see the reality of families struggling to deal with the loss of a loved one almost every day. This struggle is infinitely more difficult when the parent’s affairs are not in order. Having a National Wills Week is so important – but it’s not enough. For us, every week is wills week. We’re actually making it wills month. When we see how we are helping families in their darkest hour, we are still further motivated to continue our quest to change the stats of a nation. The top 5 consequences of passing away without a will “Your children’s inheritance could pass to the Government Guardian’s Fund or appointed guardian rather than to a Trust that will ensure your wishes for them are carried out.” At Capital Legacy, we have dedicated the last 8 years to helping more South Africans get valid wills in place. We have helped more than 300 000 people to date and are committed to changing the statistics of our nation. Part of our efforts in this endeavour is to help more people understand why it’s important to finalise their will, the other part is to make it easy and convenient for them… so there’s no excuse not to get this important task done. Our mission is to help more South Africans get valid wills in place and change the shocking statistics we see in the market. Please don’t procrastinate – get your will sorted today. Alex Simeonides – CEO and co-founder of Capital Legacy.