US equity futures started the week on the back foot as a stimulus deal remained elusive and coronavirus infections hit a record for a second day. Asian stocks drifted and Treasuries advanced. S&P 500 futures retreated, and European contracts pointed lower. Stocks slipped in Japan and South Korea, with shares in China underperforming. The dollar strengthened. US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said the chamber could pass a pandemic relief plan this week, though a deal with the White House remains elusive as chances faded of a resolution before next week’s election. Ten-year Treasury yields ticked lower, but remained above 0.8%. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Elsewhere, oil extended a decline. US stocks rose Friday as investors held out hope for a spending package.  Investors remain focused on the chances of an agreement on a stimulus package as November’s election fast approaches. Still, concerns are mounting that surging virus cases could force additional business closures. The US added more than 85,000 cases in a record figure for one day. “There is very limited incentive on both sides to get a deal done,” Joseph Shaposhnik, a portfolio manager at TCW, said on Bloomberg TV. “The market has baked that in, has baked in the election and is looking out six months and thinking what are the odds life begins to normalise, a vaccine is introduced.” President Donald Trump’s chief of staff said the US is “not going to control” the pandemic. The World Health Organisation’s director general said some countries in the northern hemisphere are facing a “dangerous moment” as France’s cases rose by more than 50,000 and infections surge in other parts of Europe. These are some events to watch this week: Here are the major moves in markets: